Techniques of the Observer
On Vision and Modernity in the
Nineteenth Century

JONATHAN CRARY

An OCTOBER Book

MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

Among the people who made this book possible are my three friends
and colleagues at Zone Sanford Kwinter, Hal Foster, and Michel Feher. It
would be impossible to suggest all the ways in which I have been enriched
and challenged because of my proximity to their work and ideas. I would also
like to thank Richard Brilliant and David Rosand for their consistent support
and encouragement, especially when these were needed most. Their counsel
was invaluable to me during the fo rmulatio n of this project. I am particularly
grateful to Rosalind Krauss for he r discerning critical suggestions and help of
many kinds. Yve-Alain Bois and Christopher Phillips read early versions of the
manuscript and made probing and highly useful observations. I did much of
my research while the recipient of a Rudolf Wittkower Fellowship from the
Columbia Art History Department. The book was completed while I was on
a Mellon Fellowship in the Society of Fellows in the Humanities at Columbia,
and thanks go to my friends at the Heyman Center during that time. In preparing the visual material I relied o n the assistance of Meighan Gale, Anne
Me nsior of ClAM, and Greg Schmitz. Ted Byfield and my research assistant
Lynne Spriggs provided last-minute editorial help. Finally, I would like to
thank Suzanne Jackson, whose commitment and risk taking as a writer continually stimulated and strengthened my own work.

Techniques of the Observer

For the rruuerialist historian, every
epoch with which he occupies himself
is only a fore-history of that which
really concerns him. And that is precisely why the appearance of repetition doesn't exist f or him in history,
because the moments in the course of
history which matter most to him
become moments of the present
through their index as 'fore-history, "
and change their characteristics
according to the catastrophic or
triu mphant determination of that
present.
-Walter Benjamin, Arcades Project

1

Modernity and the Problem of the Observer

7be field ofvision has always seemed
to me comparable to the ground of
an archaeological excavation.

-Paul Virilio
This is a book about vision and its historical construction. Although it
primarily addresses events and developments before 1850, it was written in
the midst of a transformation in the nature of visuality probably more profound than the break that separates medieval imagery from Renaissance perspective. The rapid development in little more than a decade of a vast array
of computer graphics techniques is part of a sweeping reconfiguration of relations between an observing subject and modes of representation that effectively nullifies most of the culturally established meanings of the terms
observer and representation. The formalization and diffusion of computergenerated imagery heralds the ubiquitous implantation of fabricated visual
"spaces" radically different from the mimetic capacities of film, photography,
and television. These latter three, at least until the mid-1970s, were generally
forms of analog media that still corresponded to the optical wavelengths of
the spectrum and to a point of view, static or mobile, located in real space.
Computer-aided design, synthetic holography, flight simulators, computer
animation, robotic image recognition, ray tracing, texture mapping, motion
control, virtual environment helmets, magnetic resonance imaging, and multispectral sensors are only a few of the techniques that are relocating vision
to a plane severed from a human observer. Obviously other older and more

2

Modernity and the Problem of the Observer

familiar modes of "seeing" will persist and coexist uneasily alongside these
new forms. But increasingly these emergent technologies of image production are becoming the dominant models of visualization according to which
primary social processes and institutions function. And, of course, they are
intertwined with the needs of global information industries and with the
expanding requirements of medical, military, and police hierarchies. Most of
the historically imponant functions of the human eye are being supplanted by
practices in which visual images no longer have any reference to the position
of an observer in a "real," optically perceived world. If these images can be
said to refer to anything, it is to millions of bits of electronic mathematical data.
Increasingly, visuality will be situated on a cybernetic and electromagnetic terrain where abstract visual and linguistic elements coincide and are consumed,
circulated, and exchanged globally.
To comprehend this relentless abstraction of the visual and to avoid mystifying it by recourse to technological explanations, many questions would
have to be posed and answered. Some of the most crucial of these questions
are historical. If there is in fact an ongoing mutation in the nature of visuality,
what forms or modes are being left behind? What kind of break is it? At the
same time, what are the elements of continuity that link contemporary imagery with older organizations of the visual? To what extent, if at all, are computer graphics and the contents of the video display terminal a funher
elaboration and refinement of what Guy Debord designated as the "society of
the spectacle?"' What is the relation between the dematerialized digital imagery of the present and the so-called age of mechanical reproduction? The most
urgent questions, though, are larger ones. How is the body, including the
observing body, becoming a component of new machines, economies, apparatuses, whether social, libidinal, or technological? In what ways is subjectivity
becoming a precarious condition of interface between rationalized systems
of exchange and networks of information?
Although this book does not directly engage these questions, it attempts
to reconsider and reconstruct pan of their historical background. It does this
by studying an earlier reorganization of vision in the first half of the nine I.
See my "Eclipse of the Spectacle," in Art After Modernism, Rethinking Representation, ed. Brian Wallis  

Modernity and the Problem of the Obseroer

3

teenth century, sketching out some of the events and forces, especially in the
and 1830s, that produced a new kind of observer and that were crucial
preconditions for the ongoing abstraction of vision outlined above. Although
the immediate cultural repercussions of this reorganization were less dramatic, they were nonetheless profound. Problems of vision then, as now, were
fundamentally questions about the body and the operation of social power.
Much of this book will examine how, beginning early in the nineteenth century, a new set of relations between the body on one hand and forms of institutional and discursive power on the other redefined the status of an
observing subject.
By outlining some of the "points of emergence" of a modern and heterogeneous regime of vision, I simultaneously address the related problem
of when, and because of what events, there was a rupture with Renaissance,
or classical, models of vision and of the observer. How and where one situates
such a break has an enormous bearing on the intelligibility of visuality within
nineteenth- and twentieth-century modernity. Most existing answers to this
question suffer from an exclusive preoccupation with problems of visual representation; the break with classical models of vision in the early nineteenth
century was far more than simply a shift in the appearance of images and art
works, or in systems of representational conventions. Instead, it was inseparable from a massive reorganization of knowledge and social practices that
modified in myriad ways the productive, cognitive, and desiring capacities of
the human subject.
In this study I present a relatively unfamiliar configuration of nineteenthcentury objects and events, that is, proper names, bodies of knowledge, and
technological inventions that rarely appear in histories of art or of modernism. One reason for doing this is to escape from the limitations of many of the
dominant histories of visuality in this period, to bypass the many accounts of
modernism and modernity that depend on a more or less similar evaluation
of the origins of modernist visual art and culture in the 1870s and 1880s. Even
today, with numerous revisions and rewritings (including some of the most
compelling neo-Marxist, feminist, and poststructuralist work), a core narrative
remains essentially unchanged. It goes something like the following: with
Manet, impressionism, ancVor postimpressionism, a new model of visual representation and perception emerges that constitutes a break with several cen-

4

Modernity and the Problem of the Observer

turies of another model of vision, loosely definable as Renaissance,
perspectival, or normative. Most theories of modern visual culture are still
bound to one or other version of this "rupture."
Yet this narrative of the end of perspectival space, of mimetic codes, and
of the referential has usually coexisted uncritically with another very different
periodization of the history of European visual culture that equally needs to
be abandoned. This second model concerns the invention and dissemination
of photography and other related forms of "realism" in the nineteenth century. Overwhelmingly, these developments have been presented as part of the
continuous unfolding of a Renaissance-based mode of vision in which photography, and eventually cinema, are simply later instances of an ongoing
deployment of perspectival space and perception. Thus we are often left with
a confusing bifurcated model of vision in the nineteenth century: on one level
there is a relatively small number of advanced artists who generated a radically new kind of seeing and signification, while on a more quotidian level
vision remains embedded within the same general "realist" strictures that had
organized it since the fifteenth century. Classical space is overturned, so it
seems, on one hand, but persists on the other. This conceptual division leads
to the erroneous notion that something called realism dominated popular
representational practices, while experiments and innovations occurred in a
distinct (if often permeable) arena of modernist art making.
When examined closely, however, the celebrated "rupture" of modernism is considerably more restricted in its cultural and social impact than the
fanfare surrounding it usually suggests. The alleged perceptual revolution of
advanced art in the late nineteenth century, according to its proponents, is an
event whose effeets occur outside the most dominant and pervasive modes of
seeing. Thus, following the logic of this general argument, it is actually a rupture that occurs on the margins of a vast hegemonic organization of the visual
that becomes increasingly powerful in the twentieth century, with the diffusion and proliferation of photography, film, and television. In a sense, however, the myth of modernist rupture depends fundamentally on the binary
model of realism vs. experimentation. That is, the essential continuity of
mimetic codes is a necessary condition for the affirmation of an avant-garde
breakthrough. The notion of a modernist visual revolution depends on the
presence of a subject with a detached viewpoint, from which modernism-

Modemily and the Problem of the Observer

5

whether as a style, as cultural resistance, or as ideological practice--can be
iSOlated against the background of a normative vision. Modernism is thus presented as the appearance of the new for an observer who remains perpetually
the same, or whose historical status is never interrogated.
It is not enough to attempt to describe a dialectical relation between the
innovations of avant-garde artists and writers in the late nineteenth century
and the concurrent "realism" and positivism of scientific and popular culture.
Rather, it is crucial to see both of these phenomena as overlapping components of a single social surface on which the modernization of vision had
begun decades earlier. I am suggesting here that a broader and far more
important transformation in the makeup of vision occurred in the early nineteenth century. Modernist painting in the 1870s and 1880s and the development of photography after 1839 can be seen as later symptoms or
consequences of this crucial systemic shift, which was well under way by 1820.
But, one may ask at this point, doesn't the history of art effectively coincide with a history of perception? Aren't the changing forms of artworks over
time the most compelling record of how vision itself has mutated historically?
This study insists that, on the contrary, a history of vision (if such is even possible) depends on far more than an account of shifts in representational practices. What this book takes as its object is not the empirical data of artworks
or the ultimately idealist notion of an isolable "perception," but instead the
no less problematic phenomenon of the observer. For the problem of the
observer is the field on which vision in history can be said to materialize, to
become itself visible. Vision and its effects are always inseparable from the
possibilities of an observing subject who is both the historical product and
the site of certain practices, techniques, institutions, and procedures of
subjectification.
Most dictionaries make little semantic distinction between the words
"observer" and "spectator," and common usage usually renders them effectively synonomous. I have chosen the term observer mainly for its etymological resonance. Unlike spectare, the Latin root for "spectator," the root for
"observe" does not literally mean "to look at" Spectator also carries specific
connotations, especially in the context of nineteenth-century culture, that I
prefer to avoid-namely, of one who is a passive onlooker at a spectacle, as
at an art gallery or theater. In a sense more pertinent to my study, obseroare

6

Modernity and the Problem of the Observer

means "to conform one's action, to comply with," as in observing rules, codes,
regulations, and practices. Though obviously one who sees, an observer is
more importantly one who sees within a prescribed set of possibilities, one
who is embedded in a system of conventions and limitations. And by "conventions" I mean to suggest far more than representational practices. U' it can
be said there is an observer specific to the nineteenth century, or to any
period, it is only as an effect of an irreducibly heterogeneous system of discursive, social, technological, and institutional relations. There is no observing subject prior to this continually shifting field.>
If I have mentioned the idea of a history of vision, it is only as a hypothetical possibility. Whether perception or vision actually change is irrelevant,
for they have no autonomous history. What changes are the plural forces and
rules composing the field in which perception occurs. And what determines
vision at any given historical moment is not some deep structure, economic
base, or world view, but rather the functioning of a collective assemblage of
disparate parts on a single social surface. It may even be necessary to consider
the observer as a distribution of events located in many different places.'
There never was or will be a self-present beholder to whom a world is transparently evident. Instead there are more or less powerful arrangements of
forces out of which the capacities of an observer are possible.
In proposing that during the first few decades of the nineteenth century
a new kind of observer took shape in Europe radically different from the type
of observer dominant in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, I doubtless provoke the question of how one can pose such large generalities, such
In one sense, my aims in this study are "genealogical," following Michel Foucault:
"I don't believe the problem can be solved by historicizing the subject as posited by the
phenome no logists, fabricating a subject that evolves through the course of history. One has
to dispense with the constituent subject, to get rid of the subject itself, that's to say, to arrive .
at an analysis which can accoum for the constitution of the subject within a historical frame-

work. And this is what I would call genealogy, that is, a form of history which can account
for the constitution of knowledges, discourses, domains of objects, etc., without having 10
make reference to a subject which is either transcendental in relation to a field of events
or runs in its empty sameness thro ughout the course of history." PowerKnowledge (New

York, 1980), 
On scientific and intellectual traditions in which objects "are aggregrates of relatively
independent parts," see Paul Feyerabend, Problems of Empiricism,  (Cambridge,
1981), 

MotJemily and the Problem of the Obseroer

7

unqualified categories as "the observer in the nineteenth century." Doesn't
this risk presenting something abstracted and divorced from the singularities
and immense diversity that characterized visual experience in that century?
Obviously there was no single nineteenth-century observer, no example that
can be located empirically. What I want to do, however, is suggest some of the
conditions and forces that defined or allowed the formation of a dominant
model of what an observer was in the nineteenth century. This will involve
sketching out a set of related events that produced crucial ways in which vision
was discussed, controlled, and incarnated in cultural and scientific practices.
At the same time I hope to show how the major terms and elements of a previous organization of the observer were no longer in operation. What is not
addressed in this study are the marginal and local forms by which dominant
practices of vision were resisted, deflected, or imperfectly constituted. The
his!Ory of such oppositional moments needs to be written, but it only
becomes legible against the more hegemonic set of discourses and practices
in which vision took shape. The typologies, and provisional unities that I use
are part of an explanatory strategy for demonstrating a general break or discontinuity at the beginning of the nineteenth century. It should not be necessary to point out there are no such things as continuities and discontinuities
in history, only in historical explanation. So my broad temporalizing is not in
the interest of a "true history," or of restoring to the record "what actually happened." The stakes are quite different: how one periodizes and where one
locates ruptures or denies them are all political choices that determine the
construction of the present. Whether one excludes or foregrounds certain
events and processes at the expense of others affects the intelligibility of the
contemporary functioning of power in which we ourselves are enmeshed.
Such choices affect whether the shape of the present seems "natural" or
whether its historically fabricated and densely sedimented makeup is made
evident.
In the early nineteenth century there was a sweeping transformation in
the way in which an observer was figured in a wide range of social practices
and domains of knowledge. A main path along which I present these developments is by examining the significance of certain optical devices. I discuss
them not for the models of representation they imply, but as sites of both
knowledge and power that operate directly on the body of the individual. Spe-

8

Modernity and the Problem of the Observer

cifically, I pose the camera obscura as paradigmatic of the dominant status of
the observer in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, while for the nineteenth century I discuss a number of optical instruments, in particular the
stereoscope, as a means of detailing the observer's transformed status. The
optical devices in question, most significantly, are points of intersection where
philosophical, scientific, and aesthetic discourses overlap with mechanical
techniques, institutional requirements, and socioeconomic forces. Each of
them is understandable not simply as the material object in question, or as
pan of a history of technology, but for the way in which it is embedded in a
much larger assemblage of events and powers. Clearly, this is to counter many
influential accounts of the history of photography and cinema that are characterized by a latent or explicit technological determinism, in which an independent dynamic of mechanical invention, modification, and perfection
imposes itself onto a social field, transforming it from the outside. On the contrary, technology is always a concomitant or subordinate part of other forces.
For Gilles Deleuze, "A society is defined by its amalgamations, not by its tools
... tools exist only in relation to the interminglings they make possible or that
make them possible.'' The point is that a history of the observer is not reducible to changing technical and mechanical practices any more than to the
changing forms of artworks and visual representation. At the same time I
would stress that even though I designate the camera obscura as a key object
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, it is not isomorphic to the optical
techniques I discuss in the context of the nineteenth century. The eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries are not analagous grids on which different cultural
objeCts can occupy the same relative positions. Rather, the position and function of a technique is historically variable; the camera obscura, as I suggest in
the next chapter, is pan of a field of knowledge and practice that does not correspond structurally to the sites of the optical devices I examine subsequently.
In Deleuze's words, "On one hand, each stratum or historical formation
implies a distribution of the visible and the articulable which aets upon itself;
on the other, from one stratum to the next there is a variation in the distri4.
Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guanari, A 7bousand Plaleaus, Capitalism and Schizo.
phnmta, trans. Brian Massumi  

M(errlity and the Problem of the Obseroer

9

bution because the visibility itself changes in style while the statements themselves change their system."5
I argue that some of the most pervasive means of producing "realistic"
effects in mass visual culture, such as the stereoscope, were in fact based on
a radical abstraction and reconstruction of optical experience, thus demandinga reconsideration of what "realism" means in the nineteenth century. I also
hope to show how the most influential figurations of an observer in the early
nineteenth century depended on the priority of models of subjective vision,
in contrast to the pervasive suppression of subjectivity in vision in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century thought. A certain notion of"subjective vision"
has long been a part of discussions of nineteenth-century culture, most often
in the context of Romanticism, for example in mapping out a shift in "the role
played by the mind in perception," from conceptions of imitation to ones of
expression, from metaphor of the mirror to that of the lamp.6 But central to
such explanations is again the idea of a vision or perception that was somehow
unique to artists and poets, that was distinct from a vision shaped by empiricist
or positivist ideas and practices.
I am interested in the way in which concepts of subjective vision, of the
productivity of the observer, pervaded not only areas of art and literature but
were present in philosophical, scientific, and technological discourses. Rather
than stressing the separation between art and science in the nineteenth century, it is important to see how they were both part of a single interlocking
field of knowledge and practice. The same knowledge that allowed the
increasing rationalization and control of the human subject in terms of new
institutional and economic requirements was also a condition for new experiments in visual representation. Thus I want to delineate an observing subject
who was both a product of and at the same time constitutive of mode rnity in
the nineteenth century. Very generally, what happens to the observer in the
nineteenth century is a process of modernization; he or she is made adequate
to a constellation of new events, forces, and institutions that together are
lOOsely and perhaps tautologically definable as "modernity."

Gilles Deleuze, Foucault, trans. Sean Hand  
M. H. Abrams, The Mirror and the lamp, Romantic TbeoryandtbeCritical Tradition
(.
london, 1953), 


Modernity and the Problem of the Observer

Modernization becomes a useful notion when extracted from teleological and primarily economic determinations, and when it encompasses not
only structural changes in political and economic formations but also the
immense reorganization of knowledge, languages, networks of spaces and
communications, and subjectivity itself. Moving out from the work of. Weber,
Lukacs, Simmel, and others, and from all the theoretical reflection spawned
by the terms "rationalization" and "reification," it is possible to pose a logic
of modernization that is radically severed from the idea of progress or development, and that entails nonlinear transformations. For Gianni Vanimo, modernity has precisely these "post-historical" features, in which the continual
production of the new is what allows things to stay the same-' It is a logic of
the same, however, that exists in inverse relation to the stability of traditional
forms. Modernization is a process by which capitalism uproots and makes
mobile that which is grounded, clears away or oblite rates that which impedes
circulation, and makes exchangeable what is singular. This applies as much
to bodies, signs, images, languages, kinship relations, religious practices, and
nationalities as it does to commodities, wealth, and labor power. Modernization becomes a ceaseless and self-perpetuating creation of new needs, new
consumption, and new production.9 Far from being exterior to this process,
the observer as human subject is completely immanent to it. Over the course
Gianni Vattimo, The End of Modernity, trans. jon R. Snyder 

Relevant here is the historical outline in Gilles Deleuze and Fe lix Guattari,Anti-Oedipu& Capitalism and Schizophrenia, trans. Robert Hurley et. al., (New York, 1978), 

interchangeable of bodies, objects, and relations. But, as Deleuze and Guanari insist, the
new exchangeability of forms under capitalism is the condition for their "re-territorialization" into new hierarchies and instinnions. Nineteendtcenrury industrialization is dis-

cussed in terms of deterrito rialization, uprooting (deracinement), and the production of
flows in Marc Guillaume, Eloge du desordre  
See Karl Marx, Grundrisse, trans. Martin Nicolaus (New York, 1973 ), 
"Hence exploration of all nature in order to discover new. useful qualities in things; universal exchange of the products of all alien climates and lands; new (artificial) preparation
of natural objects, by which they are given new use values. The exploration of the earth in
all directions, to discover new things of use as well as new useful qualities of the old; ...
likewise the discovery, creation and satisfaction of new needs arising from sociery itSelf;
the cultivation of all the qualities of the social human being, production of the same in a
form as rich 3$ possible in needs, because rich in qualities and relations-productio n o f
this being as the most total and universal possible social product."

M(ernity and the Problem of the Obseroer


of the nineteenth century, an observer increasingly had to function within disjunct and defarniliarized urban spaces, the perceptual and temporal dislocations of railroad travel, telegraphy, industrial production, and flows of
rypographic and visual information. Concurrently, the discursive identity of
lhe observer as an object of philosophical reflection and empirical study
underwent an equally drastic renovation.
The early work ofJean Baudrillard details some of the conditions of this
new terrain in which a nineteenth-century observer was situated. For Baudrillard, one of the crucial consequences of the bourgeois political revolutions at the end of the 1700s was the ideological force that animated the myths
of me rights of man, the right to equality and to happiness. In the nineteenth
century, for the first time, observable proof became needed in order to demonstrate that happiness and equality had in fact been attained. Happiness had
to be "measurable in terms of objects and signs," something that would be
evident to the eye in terms of "visible criteria. "10 Several decades earlier, Walter
Benjamin had also written about the role of the commodity in generating a
"phantasmagoria of equality." Thus modernity is inseparable from on one
hand a remaking of lhe observer, and on the other a proliferation of circulating signs and objects whose effects coincide with their visuality, or what
Adorno calls Anschaulichkeit. 11
Baudrillard's account of modernity outlines an increasing destabilization and mobility of signs and codes beginning in the Renaissance, signs previously rooted to relatively secure positions within fixed social hierarchies.
There is no such thing as fashion in a society of caste and rank,
since one is assigned a place irrevocably. Thus class mobility is
non-existent. An interdiction protects the signs and assures them
· Jean Baudrillard, La soaete de consommation  
observer! to the order of bourgeois rationality and, ultimately, the age of advanced industry,
Which was made by the eye when it accustomed itself to perceiving reality as a reality of
obJects and hence basically of commodities." In Search of Wagner, trans. Rodney Uvingone  
..· Theodor Adorno, Aesthetic 7beory, trans. C. Lenhardt  
. Y denymg the 1mplicidy conceprual nature of art, the norm of visuality reifies visuality
an opaque, impenetrable quality-a replica of the petrified world outside, wary of
everything that might interfere with the pretence of the harmony the work puts forth."


Modernity and the Problem ofthe Obseroer

a total clarity; each sign refers unequivocally to a status.... In caste
societies, feudal or archaic, cruel societies, the signs are limited in
number, and are not widely diffused, each one functions with its
full value as interdiction, each is a reciprocal obligation between
castes, clans, or persons. The signs are therefore anything but arbitrary. The arbitrary sign begins when, instead of linking rwo rsons
in an unbreakable reciprocity, the signifier starts referring back to
the disenchanted world of the signified, a common denominator
of the real world to which no one has any obligation.12
Thus for Baudrillard modernity is bound up in the capacity of newly empowered social classes and groups to overcome the "exclusiveness of signs" and
to initiate "a proliferation of signs on demand." Imitations, copies, counter·
feits, and the techniques to produce them (which would include the Italian
theater, linear perspective, and the camera obscura) were all challenges to the
aristocratic monopoly and control of signs. The problem of mimesis here is
not one of aesthetics but of social power, a power founded on the capacity to
produce equivalences.
For Baudrillard and many others, however, it is clearly in the nineteenth
century, alongside the development of new industrial techniques and new
forms of political power, that a new kind of sign emerges. These new signs,
"potentially indentical objects produced in indefinite series," herald the
moment when the problem of mimesis disappears.
The relation berween them [identical objects] is no longer that of
an original to its counterfeit. The relation is neither analogy nor
reflection, but equivalence and indifference. In a series, objects
become undefined simulacra of each other.. .. We know now that
is on the level of re production, of fashion, media, advertising,
information, and communication (what Marx called the unessential sectors of capitalism) . . . that is to say in the sphere of the simulacra and the code, that the global process of capital is held
together."
Je an Baudrillard, L'echange symbolique et Ia mort  
trans. Paul Foss (New York, 1983 ), 
Baudrillard, L 'echange symbolique et Ia m ort, 

M(emity and the Problem of the Observer


Within this new field of serially produced objects, the most significant,
in terms of their social and cultural impact, were photography and a host of
related techniques for the industrialization of image making.'4 The photograph becomes a central element not only in a new commodity economy but
in the reshaping of an entire territory on which signs and images, each effectively severed from a referent, circulate and proliferate. Photographs may
have some apparent similarities with older types of images, such as perspectival painting or drawings made with the aid of a camera obscura; but the vast
systemic rupture of which photography is a pan renders such similarities
insignificant. Photography is an element of a new and homogeneous terrain
of consumption and circulation in which an observer becomes lodged. To
understand the "photography effect" in the nineteenth century, one must see
it as a crucial component of a new cultural economy of value and exchange,
not as pan of a continuous history of visual representation.
Photography and money become homologous forms of social power in
the nineteenth century." They are equally totalizing systems for binding and
unifying all subjects within a single global network of valuation and desire. As
Marx said of money, photography is also a great leveler, a democratizer, a
"mere symbol," a fiction "sanctioned by the so-called universal consent of
mankind."16 Both are magical forms that establish a new set of abstract relations between individuals and things and impose those relations as the real.
It is through the distinct but interpenetrating economies of money and photography that a whole social world is represented and constituted exclusively
as signs.
Photography, however, is not the subject of this book. Crucial as photography may be to the fate of visuality in the nineteenth century and beyond,

The most important model for serial industrial production in the nineteenth century

was ammunition and military spare parts. That the need for absolute similarity and
exchangeability carne out of the requirements of warfare, not out of developments in an
onomic seaor, is argued in Manuel De Landa, War in the A,ge of Intelligent Machines
ew York, 1990).

:· For related arguments, see john Tagg, 'The Currency of the Photograph," in TbinkT:.:;,hotograpby, ed. Victor Burgin  

Halifax, 1984), 
. ) Karl Marx Capital, vo l. I , trans. Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling (New York,
7 . p.91.


Modernity and tbe Problem of the Observer-

its invention is secondary to the events I intend to detail here. My contention
is that a reorganization of the observer occurs in the nineteenth century
before the appearance of photography. What takes place from around 1810 to
is an uprooting of vision from the stable and fixed relations incarnated
in the camera obscura. If the camera obscura, as a concept, subsist,ed as an
objective ground of visual truth, a variety of discourses and practices-in philosophy, science, and in procedures of social normalization-tend to abolish
the foundations of that ground in the early nineteenth century. In a sense, what
occurs is a new valuation of visual experience: it is given an unprecendented
mobility and exchangeability, abstracted from any founding site or referent.
In chapter 3, I describe certain aspects of this revaluation in the work of
Goethe and Schopenhauer and in early nineteenth-century psychology and
physiology, where the very nature of sensatio n and perception takes on many
of the features of equivalence and indifference that will later characterize photography and other networks of commodities and signs. It is this visual "nihilism" that is in the forefront of empirical studies of subjeaive vision, a vision
that encompasses an autono mous perception severed from any external
referent. What must be emphasized, however, is that this new autonomy and
abstraction of vision is not only a precondition fo r modernist painting in the
later nineteenth century but also for forms of visual mass culture appearing
much earlier. In chapter 4, I discuss how optical devices that became forms
of mass entertainment, such as the stereoscope and the phenakistiscope, originally derived from new empirical knowledge of the physiological status of
the observer and of vision. Thus certain forms of visual experience usually
uncritically categorized as "realism" are in fact bound up in non-veridical theories of vision that effeaively annihilate a real wo rld. Visual experience in the
nineteenth century, despite all the anempts to authenticate and naturalize it,
no lo nger has anything like the apodictic claims of the camera obscura to
establish its truth. On a superficial level the fictio ns of realism operate und isturbed, but the processes of modernization in the nineteenth century did not
depend on such illusions. New modes of circulation, communication, production, consumption, and rationalization all demanded and shaped a new
kind of observer-consumer.
What I call the observer is actually just o ne effect of the construa ion of
a new kind of subject o r individual in the nineteenth century. The work of

JJ(emily and the Problem of the Observer


Michel Foucault has been crucial for its delineation of processes and institutions that rationalized and modernized the subjea, in the context of social
and economic transformations." Without making causal connections, Foucault demonstrates that the industrial revolution coincided with the appearance of "new methods for administering" large populations of workers, city
dwellers, students, prisoners, hospital patients, and other groups. As individuals became increasingly torn away from older regimes of power, fro m agrarian and artisanal production, and from large familial setups, new
decentralized arrangements were devised to control and regulate masses of
relatively free-floating subjects. For Foucault, nineteenth-century modernity
is inseparable from the way in which dispersed mechanisms of power coincide with new modes of subjectivity, and he thus details a range of pervasive
and local techniques for controlling, maintaining, and making useful new
multiplicities of individuals. Modernizatio n consists in this production of
manageable subjects through what he calls "a certain policy of the body, a certain way of rendering a group of men docile and useful. This policy required
the involvement of definite relations of power; it called for a technique o f
overlapping subjection and objectification; it brought with it new procedures
of individualization. "ta
Although he ostensibly examines "disciplinary" institutions like prisons,
schools, and the military, he also describes the role of the newly constituted
human sciences in regulating and modifying the behavior of individuals. The
management of subjects depended above all on the accumulation of knowledge about them, whether in medicine, education, psychology, physiology,
the rationalization of labor, or child care. Out of this knowledge came what
Foucault calls "a very real technology, the technology of individuals," which
he insists is "inscribed in a broad historical process: the development at about
the same time o f many other techno logies--agrono mical, industrial,
economical."'
Crucial to the development of these new disciplinary techniques of the
subject was the fixing of quantitative and statistical nonns of behavior. 20 The


Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish, trans. Alan Sheridan (New York, 1977).
:oucault, Discipline and Punish, 
Foucault, Discipline a nd Punish,. 224- 225.
or Georges Canguilhem, processes of normalization overlap with modernization


Modernity and the Problem of the Observer

assessment of "normality" in medicine, psychology, and other fields became
an essential part of the shaping of the individual to the requirements of instirutional power in the nineteenth cenrury, and it was through these disciplines
that the subject in a sense became visible. My concern is how the individual
as observer became an object of investigation and a locus ofknowlec;lge beginning in the first few decades of the 1800s, and how the starus of the observing
subject was transformed. As I have indicated, a key object of srudy in the
empirical sciences then was subjective vision, a vision that had been taken our
of the incorporeal relations of the camera obscura and relocated in the human
body. It is a shift signaled by the passage from the geometrical optics of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to physiological optics, which dominated both scientific and philosophical discussion of vision in the nineteenth
century. Thus knowledge was accumulated about the constitutive role of the
body in the apprehension of a visible world, and it rapidly became obvious
that efficiency and rationalization in many areas of human activity depended
on information about the capacities of the human eye. One result of the new
physiological optics was to expose the idiosyncrasies of the "normal" eye. Retinal afterimages, peripheral vision, binocular vision, and thresholds of anention all were srudied in terms of determining quantifiable norms and
parameters. The widespread preoccupation with the defects of human vision
defined ever more precisely an outline of the normal, and generated new
technologies for imposing a normative vision on the observer.
In the midst of such research, a number of optical devices were invented
that later became elements in the mass visual culrure of the nineteenth cenrury. The phenakistiscope, one of many machines designed for the illusory
simulation of movement, was produced in the midst of the empirical study of
retinal afterimages; the stereoscope, a dominant form for the consumption of
photographic imagery for over half a century, was first developed within the
effort to quantify and formalize the physiological operation of binocular
vision. What is important, then, is that these central components of ninein the nineteenth century, "Like pedagogical reform, hospilal reform expresses a demand
for rationalization which also appears in politics, as it appears in the economy, under the
effect of nascent industrial mechanization, and which finally ends up in what has since been
called normalization." The Normal and the Pathological, trans. Carolyn Fawcett (New York.
1989), 

..,, -"the Problem of the Observer

Moderrii·J "''""


teenth-century "realism," of mass visual culture, preceded the invention of
hotography and in no  required photographic procedures or even the
evelopment of mass production techniques. Rather they are inextricably
dependent on a new arrangement of knowledge about the body and the constitutive relation of that knowledge to social power. These apparatuses are the
outcome of a complex remaking of the individual as observer into something
calculable and regularizable and of human vision into something measurable
and thus exchangeable 21 The standardization of visual imagery in the nineteenth century must be seen then not simply as part of new forms of mechanized reproduction but in relation to a broader process of normalization and
subjection of the observer. If there is a revolution in the nature and function
of the sign in the nineteenth century, it does not happen independently of the
remaking of the subject. 22
Readers of Discipline and Punish have often noted Foucault's categorical declaration, "Our sociery is not one of spectacle but of surveillance.... We
are neither in the amphitheatre nor on the stage but in the Panoptic
machine."23 Although this remark occurs in the midst of a comparison
between arrangements of power in antiquiry and moderniry, Foucault's use of
the term "spectacle" is clearly bound up in the polemics of post-1968 France.
Measurement takes on a primary role in a broad range of the physical sciences
between 1800 and 1850, the key date being 1840 according to Thomas S. Kuhn, 'The Function of Measurement in Modern Physical Science," in 1be EsserUial Tension' Selected Studies In Scientific Tradition and Change  
Ian Hacking: "After 1800 or so there is an avalanche of numbers, most notably in the social
sciences.... Perhaps a turning point was signaled in 1832, the year that Charles Babbage,
tnventor of the digital computer, published his brief pamphlet urging publication of tables
of all the constant numbers known in the sciences and the ans." Hacking, Representing and
1ntervening introductory Topics in the Philosophy ofNatural Sciena! 

Baudrillard's notion of a shift from the fixed signs of feudal and aristocratic societies

t the exchangeable symbolic regime of modernity finds a reciprocal transformation anic-

u ated by Foucault in terms of the individual: 'The moment that saw the transition from
his
tor·
·

rnO-ntual mechanisms for the formation of individuality to the scientifico-disciplinary
th
JSms, when the normal took over from the ancestral, and measurement from starus,
substituting for the individuality of the memorable man that of the calculable man, that
Of rnent when the sciences of man became possible is the moment when a new technology
er and a new political anatomy of the body were implemented." Discipline and Pun p.193.
F
oucault, Discipline and Punish, 



Modernity and the Problem of the Observer

When he wrote the book in the early 1970s, "spectacle" was an obvious allusion to analyses of contemporary capitalism by Guy Debord and others. 24 One
can well imagine Foucault's disdain, as he wrote one of the greatest meditations on modernity and power, for any facile or superficial use of "speCtacle"
as an explanation of how the masses are "controlled" or "dupeq;: by media
images. 25
But Foucault's opposition of surveillance and speCtacle seems to overlook how the effectS of these two regimes of power can coincide. Using Bentham's panopticon as a primary theoretical object, Foucault relentlessly
emphasizes the ways in which human subjectS became objectS of observation,
in the form of institutional control or scientific and behavioral study; but he
neglectS the new forms by which vision itself became a kind of discipline or
mode of work. The nineteenth-century optical devices I discuss, no less than
the panopticon, involved arrangements of bodies in space, regulations of
activity, and the deployment of individual bodies, which codified and normalized the observer within rigidly defined systems of visual consumption.
They were techniques for the management of attention, for imposing homogeneity, anti-nomadic procedures that fixed and isolated the observer using
"partitioning and cellularity ... in which the individual is reduced as a political force." The organization of mass culture did not proceed on some other
inessential or superstructural area of social practice; it was fully embedded
within the same transformations Foucault outlines.
I am hardly suggesting, however, that the "society of the speCtacle" suddenly appears alongside the developments I am detailing here. The "spectacle," as Debord uses the term, probably does not effectively take shape until
several decades into the twentieth century26 In this book, I am offering some
Guy Debord, The Society ofthe SpecUlele, trans. Donald Nicholson-Smith (New York,
1990). First published in France in 1967.
On the place of vision in Foucault's thought, see Gilles Deleuze, Foucault, 
Following up on a brief remark by Debord, I have discussed the case for placing the
onset of the "society of the spectacle" in the late 1920s, concurrent with the technological
and institutional origins of television, the beginning of synchronized sound in movies, the
use of mass media techniques by the Nazi party in Germany, the rise of urbanism, and the
political failure of surrealism in France, in my "Spectacle, Attention, Counter-Memory,''

October 50 (Fall1989), 

MotJernifY and the Problem of the Obseroer


nOles on its prehistory, on the early background of the spectacle. Debord, in
a well-known passage, poses one of its main features:
Since the spectacle's job is to cause a world that is no longer
directly perceptible to be seen via different specialized mediations, it is inevitable that it should elevate the human sense of sight
the special place once occupied by touch; the most abstract of
the senses, and the most easily deceived, sight is naturally the
most readily adaptable to present-day society's generalized


abstraction. 27
Thus, in my delineation of a modernization and revaluation of vision, I indicate how the sense of touch had been an integral pan of classical theories of
vision in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The subsequent dissociation of touch from sight occurs within a pervasive "separation of the senses"
and industrial remapping of the body in the nineteenth century. The loss of
touch as a conceptual component of vision meant the unloosening of the eye
from the network of referentiality incarnated in tactility and its subjective relation to perceived space. This autonomization of sight, occurring in many different domains, was a historical condition for the rebuilding of an observer
fitted for the tasks of "spectacular" consumption. Not only did the empirical
isolation of vision allow its quantification and homogenization but it also
enabled the new objects of vision (whether commodities, photographs, or the
act of perception itself) to assume a mystified and abstract identity, sundered
from any relation to the observer's position within a cognitively unified field.
The stereoscope is one major cultural site on which this breach between tangibility and visuality is singularly evident.
If Foucault describes some of the epistemological and institutional conditions of the observer in the nineteenth century, others have detailed the

actual shape and density of the field in which perception was transformed.
Perhap
s more than anyone else, Walter Benjamin has mapped out the heterogeneous texture of events and objects out of which the observer in that
century
was composed. In the diverse fragments of his writings, we encounter

Debord, The Society ofthe Spectocle, sec. 18.


Modernity and the Problem ofthe Observe,.

an ambulatory observer shaped by a convergence of new urban spaces, technologies, and new economic and symbolic functions of images and products--forms of artificial lighting, new use of mirrors, glass and steel
architecture, railroads, museums, gardens, photography, fashion, crowds. Perception for Benjamin was acutely temporal and kinetic; he make_;; clear how
modernity subvertS even the possibility of a contemplative beholder. There
is never a pure access to a single object; vision is always multiple, adjacent to
and overlapping with other objectS, desires, and vectors. Even the congealed
space of the museum cannot transcend a world where everything is in
circulation.
It should not go unremarked that one topic is generally unexamined by
Benjamin: nineteenth-century painting. It simply is not a significant part of the
field of which he provides a rich inventory. Of the many things this omission
implies, it certainly indicates that for him painting was not a primary element
in the reshaping of perception in the nineteenth century.28 The observer of
paintings in the nineteenth century was always also an observer who simultaneously consumed a proliferating range of optical and sensory experiences.
In other words, paintings were produced and assumed meaning not in some
impossible kind of aesthetic isolation, or in a continuous tradition of painterly
codes, but as one of many consumable and fleeting elements within an
expanding chaos of images, commodities, and stimulation.
One of the few visual artists that Benjamin discusses is Charles Meryon,
mediated through the sensibility of Baudelaire. 29 Meryon is important not for
the formal or iconographic content of this work, but as an index of a damaged
sensorium responding to the early shocks of modernization. Meryon's disturbing images of the mineral inertness of a medieval Paris take on the value
of "afterimages" of an annihilated set of spaces at the onset of Second Empire
urban renewal. And the ne rvous crosshatched incisions of his etched plates
bespeak the atrophy of artisanal handicraft in the face of serial industrial
reproduction. The example of Meryon insists that vision in the nineteenth
See, for example, Benjamin, Reflections, trans. Edmundjephcott (New York, 1978),

in impaning information is reduced.·

Walter Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire, A Lyric Poet in the Era of High CopiUIistn.
trans. Harry Zohn  

,,.., and the Problem of the Observer

JJ(ern"J


century was inseparable from transience-that is, from new temporalities,
s
ds, experiences of flux and obsolescence, a new density and sedimen! : n ofthe structure of visual memory. Perception within the context of modernity, for Benjamin, never disclosed the world as presence. One mode was
the observer asjliineur, a mobile consumer of a ceaseless succession of illusory commodity-like images.30 But the destructive dynamism of moderniza-

tion was also a condition for a vision that would resist its effects, a revivifying
perception of the present caught up in its own historical afterimages. Ironically, "'the standardized and denatured" perception of the masses, to which
Benjamin sought radical alternatives, owed much of its power in the nineteenrh century to the empirical study and quantification of the retinal afterimage and its particular temporality, as I indicate in chapters 3 and 4.
Nineteenth-century painting was also slighted, for very different reasons,
by !he fo unders of modern art history, a generation or two before Benjamin.
It is easy to forget that art history as an academic discipline has its origins
wirhin !his same nineteenth-century 
 historicist and evolutionary modes of rhought allowing forms to be

arrayed and classified as an unfolding over time;  sociopolitical transformations involving the creation of leisure time and !he cultural enfranchisement of more secto rs of urban populatio ns, one result of which was the public
art museum; and  new serial modes of image reproduction, which permined borh !he global circulation and juxtaposition of highly credible copies
of disparate artworks. Yet if nineteenrh-century modernity was in part the
matrix of art history, !he artworks of !hat moderniry were excluded from art
history's dominant explanatory and classifying schemes, even into the early
twentieth century.
For example, two crucial traditions, o ne stemming from Morelli and
another from the Warburg School, were fundamentally unable or unwilling
to include nineteenth-century art within the scope of their investigations. This
spite of the dialectical relation of these practices to the historical moment
of the·
r own emergence: the concern of Morellian connoisseurship with

;_,. 1See Susan Buck-Mo rss, "The Flaneur, the Sandwichman, and the Whore' The Politics
1

ering," New Gernu;,n CritiqW! 39  


Modernity and the Problem of the ObsertJer

authorship and originality occurs when new technologies and forms of
exchange put in question notions of the "hand," authorship, and originality;
and the quest by Warburg School scholars for symbolic forms expressive of
the spiritual foundations of a unified culture coincides with a collective cultural despair at the absence or impossibility of such forms in the present. Thus
these overlapping modes of art history took as their privileged object the figurative an of antiquity and the Renaissance .
What is of interest here is the penetrating recognition, subliminal or otherwise, by the founding art historians that nineteenth-century an was fundamentally discontinuous with the art of preceding centuries. Clearly, the
discontinuity they sensed is not the familiar break signified by Manet and
impressionism; rather it is a question of why painters as diverse as Ingres,
Overbeck, Courbet, Delaroche, Meissonier, von Kobell, Millais, Gleyre, Friedrich, Cabanel, Gerome, and Delacroix (to name only a few) together incarnated a surface of mimetic and figural representation apparently similar to but
disquietingly unlike what had preceded it. The art historian's silence, indifference, or even disdain for eclecticism and "degraded" forms implied that
this period constituted a radically different visual language that could not be
submined to the same methods of analysis, that could not be made to speak
in the same ways, that even could not be read.3'
The work of subsequent generations of art historians, however, soon
obscured that inaugural intuition of rupture, of difference. The nineteenth
century gradually became assimilated into the mainstream of the discipline
through apparently dispassionate and objective examination, similar to what
had happened earlier with the an of late antiquity. But in order to domesticate
that strangeness from which earlier scholars had recoiled, historians
explained nineteenth-century art according to models taken from the study
of older art.32 Initially, mainly formal categories from Renaissance painting
The hostility to most contemporary an in Burckhardt, Hildebrand, Wolfflin, Riegl,
and Fiedler is recounted in Michael Padro, 7be Critical Historians of Att (New Haven,
1982), 
One of the first influential anempts to impose the methodology and vocabulary of
earlier an history onto nineteenth-century material was Walter Friedlaender, David to
Delacroix, trans. Raben Goldwater (Cambridge, Mass., 1952); original German editio n,
Friedlaende r describes French painting in terms of alternating classical and baroque
phases.



JJotferTI

of tbe Observer


sferred to nineteenth-century artists, but beginning in the 1940s
were tran
·ons like class content and popular imagery became surrogates for tradinOl 1 . nography. By inserting nineteenth-century painting into a continuuona tco
. ry of art and a unified discursive apparatus of explanation, however,
oUS h JStO
th ·ng of its essential difference was lost. To recover that difference one
some '
must recognize how the making, the consumption, and the effectiveness of
that art is dependent on an observer-and on an organization of the visible
that vastly exceeds the domain conventionally examined by art history. The
isolation of painting after 1830 as a viable and self-sufficient category for study
becomes highly problematic, to say the least. The circulation and reception
ofall visual imagery is so closely interrelated by the middle of the century that
any single medium or form of visual representation no longer has a significant
autonomous identity. The meanings and effects of any single image are always
adjacent to this overloaded and plural sensory environment and to the
observer who inhabited it. Benjamin, for example, saw the art museum in the
mid-nineteenth century as simply one of many dream spaces, experienced
and traversed by an observer no differently from arcades, botanical gardens,
wax museums, casinos, railway stations, and department stores.33
Nietzsche describes the position of the individual within this milieu in
terms of a crisis of assimilation:
Sensibility immensely more irritable; . .. the abundance of disparate impressions greater than ever: cosmopolitanism in foods, literatures, newspapers, forms, tastes, even landscapes. The tempo of
this influx prestissimo; the impressions erase each other; one
instinctively resists taking in anything, taking anything deeply, to
"digest" anything; a weakening of the power to digest results from
this. A kind of adaptation to the flood of impressions takes place:
men unlearn spontaneous action, they merely react to stimuli from
the outside.3
Like Benjamin, Nietzsche here undermines any possibility of a contemplative
beholder and poses an anti-aesthetic distraction as a central feature of mod33. Seew 1
F . a ter Benjamin, Das Passagen-Werk,   
(N )lnedrich Nietzsche, 7be Will to Power, trans. Walter Kaufmann and R.J. Ho llingdale
ork, 1967), 


Modernity and the Problem of the Observe,.

ernity, one that Georg Simmel and others were to examine in detail. When
Nietzsche uses quasi-scientific words like "influx," "adaptation," "react," and
"irritability," it is about a world that has already been reconfigured into new
perceptual components. Modernity, in this case, coincides with the collapse
of classical models of vision and their stable space of representatlons. Instead,
observation is increasingly a question of equivalent sensations and stimuli that
have no reference to a spatial location. What begins in the 1820s and 1830s is
a repositioning of the observer, outside of the fixed relations of interiorexterior presupposed by the camera obscura and into an undemarcated terrain on
which the distinction berween internal sensation and external signs is irrevocably blurred. If there is ever a "liberation" of vision in the nineteenth century, this is when it first happens. In the absence of the juridical model of the
camera obscura, there is a freeing up of vision, a falling away of the rigid structures that had shaped it and constituted its objects.
But almost simultaneous with this final dissolution of a transcendent
foundation for vision emerges a plurality of means to recode the activity of the
eye, to regiment it, to heighten its productivity and to prevent its distraction.
Thus the imperatives of capitalist modernization, while demolishing the field
of classical vision, generated techniques for imposing visual attentiveness,
rationalizing sensation, and manging perception. They were disciplinary
techniques that required a notion of visual experience as instrumental, modifiable, and essentially abstract, and that never allowed a real world to acquire
solidity or permanence. Once vision became located in the empirical immediacy of the observer's body, it belonged to time, to flux, to death. The guarantees of authority, identity, and universality supplied by the camera obscura
are of another epoch.

2 The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

7bis kind of knowledge seems to be
the truest, the most authentic, for it
has tbe object before itself in its
entirety and completeness. 7bis bare
fact of certainty, however, is really
and admittedly the abstractest and
the poorest kind of truth.
--G. W. F. Hegel
A prevalent tendency in methodo-

logical discussion is to approach
problems of knowledge sub specie
aeternitatis, as it were. Statements are
compared with eacb other without
regard to tbeir history and without
considering that they might belong to
different historical strata.

- Paul Feyerabend
Most attempts to theorize vision and visuality are wedded to models that
emphasize a continuous and overarching Western visual tradition. Clearly it
often strat · a1
eg1c ly necessary to map the outlines of a dominant Western
S
pecul .
auve or scopic tradition of vision in some sense continuous, for
l·n
stanc · f
e, rom Plato to the present, or from the quattrocento into the late nine-


Tbe Camera Obscura and Its SubJect

teenth century. My concern is not so much to argue against these models,
which have their usefulness, but rather to insist that there are some important
discontinuities such monolithic constructions have obscured. Again, the spe.
cific account that interests me here, one that has become almost ubiquitous
and continues to be developed in a variety of forms, is that the emergence of
photography and cinema in the nineteenth century is the fulfillment of a long
unfolding of technological andor ideological development in the West
whereby the camera obscura evolves into the photographic camera. Such a
schema implies that at each step in this evolution the same essential presup.
positions about an observer's relation to the world are in place. One could
name several dozen books on the history of film or photography in whose first
chapter appears the obligatory seventeenth-century engraving depicting a
camera obscura, as a kind of inaugural or incipient form on a long evolu·
tionary ladder.
These models of continuity have been used by historians of divergent
and even antithetical political positions. Conservatives tend to pose an
account of ever-increasing progress coward verisimilitude in representation,
in which Renaissance perspective and photography are part of the same quest
for a fully objective equivalent of a "natural vision." In these histories of sci·
ence or culture, the camera obscura is made part of the development of the
sciences of obse rvation in Europe during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The accumulation of knowledge about light, lenses, and the eye
becomes part of a progressive sequence of discoveries and achievements that
lead to increasingly accurate investigation and representation of the physical
world. Privileged events in such a sequence usually also include the invention
of linear perspective in the fifteenth century, the career of Galileo, the indue·
tive work of Newton, and the emergence of British empiricism.
Radical historians, however, usually see the camera obscura and cinema
as bound up in a single enduring apparatus of political and social power, elab·
orated over several centuries, that continues co discipline and regulate the sta·
tus of an observer. The camera is thus seen by some as an exemplary
indication of the ideological nature of representation, embodying the epis·
temological presumptions of "bourgeois humanism." It is often argued chat
the cinematic apparatus, emerging in the late nineteenth and early twentieth

--a bscura and Its Subject

71Je cau-··


·es perpetuates, albeit in increasingly differentiated forms, the same
centurt ,
of representation and the same transcendental subject.
gy
I
ideoo
What 1 hope to do in this chapter is briefly to articulate the camera
obscura model of vision in terms of its historical specificity, in order subsequendy to suggest how this model collapsed in the 1820s and 1830s, when it
was displaced by radically different notions of what an observer was, and of
what constituted vision. If, later in the nineteenth century, cinema or photography seem to invite formal comparisons with the camera obscura, it is within
a social, cultural, and scientific milieu where there had already been a profound break with the conditions of vision presupposed by this device.
It has been known for at least two thousand years that when light passes
through a small hole into a dark, enclosed interior, an inverted image will
appear on the wall opposite the hole. Thinkers as remote from each other as
Euclid, Aristode, Alhazen, Roger Bacon, Leonardo, and Kepler noted this phenomenon and speculated in various ways how it might or might not be analogous to the functioning of human vision. The long history of such
observations has yet to be written and is far removed from the aims and limited scope of this chapter.
It is important, however, to make a distinction between the enduring
empirical fact that an image can be produced in this way and the camera
obscura as a historically constructed artifact. For the camera obscura was not
simply an inert and neutral piece of equipment or a set of technical premises
to be tinkered with and improved over the years; rather, it was embedded in
a much larger and denser organization of knowledge and of the observing
subject. Historically speaking, we must recognize how for nearly two hundred
Years, from the late 1500s to the end of the 1700s, the structural and o ptical
principles of the camera obscura coalesced into a dominant paradigm
through which was described the status and possibilities of an observer. I
emph ·
D . 3S!Ze that this paradigm was dominant though obviously not exclusive.
unng the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the camera obscura was
W!:out question the most widely used model for explaining human vision,
b· for representing the relation ofa perce iver and the position of a knowing
u Jectto an
external world. This highly problematic object was far more than


Portable camera obscura. Mid-eighteenth century

The Camera Obscura and Its SubJect

a Qbscura and Its Subject

1becamen


·m ly an optical device. For over two hundred years it subsisted as a philoical metaphor, a model in the science of physical optics, and was also a
soph ·caJ apparatus used in a large range of cultural activities.' For two centec m
wries it stood as model, in both rationalist and empiricist thought, of how
observation leads to truthful inferences about the world; at the same time the
hysical incarnation of that model was a widely used means of observing the
isible world, an instrument of popular entertainment, of scientific inquiry,
and of artistic practice. The formal operation of a camera obscura as an
abstract diagram may remain constant, but the function of the device or metaphor within an actual social or discursive field has fluctuated decisively. The
fate of the camera obscura paradigm in the nineteenth century is a case in
point.' In the texts of Marx, Bergson, Freud, and others the very apparatus that
a century earlier was the site of truth becomes a model for procedures and
forces that conceal, invert, and mystify truth.3

The extensive literature on the camera obscura is summarized in Aaron Scharf, Art
and Photography  and in Lawrence Gowing, Venneer (New York,

1952). General studies not mentioned in those works are Moritz von Rohr, Zur Entwick·
lung der dunkeln Kammer  and John]. Hammond, 7be Camera Obscura.·
A Chronicle (Bristol, 1981 ). For valuable information on the uses of the camera obscura in
the eighteenth century, see Helmuth FritzSche, Bernardi:> Beotto genannt Canaletto
 ISS-194, and Decio Gioseffi, Canaletto; II quaderno delle Galerie
Veneziane e l'impiego della camera attica . Works on the artistic use of the
camera obscura in the seventeenth century include Charles Seymour, Jr., "Dark Chamber
and Light-Filled room, Vermeer and the Camera Obscura," Art Bulletin 46, no. 3 (September 1964), 
otographic Eye," Metropolitan Museum ofArt Bulletin 5, no. I (Summer 1946), 
 70--180; Arthur K Wheelock, Perspective, Optics, and Delft Artists Around 1650 (New
· 1977); and Joel Snyder, "Picturing Visio n," Critical Inquiry 6 (Spring 1980), 
Cf Col'm MurrayTurbayne, 7beMyth 
With 3- 208, which poses the camera obscura as a completely ahistorical concept linked
ahist representative or copy theories of perception from antiquity to the present. An equally
neal discussion of the structure of modern photography and of the Canesian camera
Elaerr::l ArthDanto, "The Representational Character of Ideas and the Problem of the
tirnore 19 ortd, m Descartes.- Critical and Interpretative. ed. Michael Hooker (Bal 78), 287-298.
3

.

Kart

SOn, Matterrx, The German Ideology, ed. C.]. Arthur (New York, 1970), 
nd Memory [1896) trans. N. M. Paul and W. S. Palmer (New York, 1988),
' '81llund Freud, 7be Interpretation ofDreams, trans. James Strachey (New York,


The Camera Obscura and Its SubJect

What then allows me to suggest that there is a common coherence to the
status of the camera obscura in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, to
pose this broad expanse of time as a unity? Clearly the physical and operational makeup of the camera obscura underwent continual modification during this period. 4 For example, the first portable devices were in use.by 1650,
and into the late 1700s models became increasingly small. And obviously the
wide range of social and representational practices associated with the instrument mutated considerably over rwo centuries. Yet despite the multiplicity of
its local manifestations, what is extraordinary is the consistency with which
certain primary features of the camera obscura are repeated throughout this
period. There is a regularity and uniformity with which the formal relations
constituted by the camera are stated again and again, no matter how heterogeneous or unrelated the locations of those statements.
I am hardly suggesting, however, that the camera obscura had simply a
discursive identity. If we can designate it in terms of statements, every one of
those statements is necessarily linked to subjects, practices, and institutions.
Perhaps the most important obstacle to an understanding of the camera
obscura, or of any optical apparatus, is the idea that optical device and
observer are rwo distinct entities, that the identity of observer exists independently from the optical device that is a physical piece of technical equipment. For what constitutes the camera obscura is precisely its multiple
identity, its "mixed" status as an epistemological figure within a discursive
order and an object within an arrangement of cultural practices. 5 The camera
obscura is what Gilles Deleuze would call an assemblage, something that is

1955), 
subsequent repudiations of the camera obscura model; see Phenomenology ofMiru, trans
J B. Baillie (New York, 1967), 
l'ideologie ; Constance Penley, Janet Bergstrom et al., "Critical Approaches,
camera Obscura no. 1 (Fall 1976), 
Ideology  
For details on various models during this period, see, for example, Gioseffi, canaeno, 
"The distinctions with which the materialist method, discriminative from the outSet,
StartS are distinctions within this highly mixed object, and it cannot present this object as
mixed or uncritical enough." Walter Benjamin, Charles Baudelaire.- A Lyric Poet intbe £rr1
ofHigh Capitalism, trans. Harry Zohn  

--a bscura and Its Subject

7beca"··


Camera obscuras. Mid-eighteenth century.

"simultaneously and inseparably a machinic assemblage and an assemblage
of enunciation," an object about which something is said and at the same time
an object that is used 6 It is a site at which a discursive formation intersects with
mate rial practices. The camera obscura, then, cannot be reduced eithe r to a
technological o r a d iscursive o bject: it was a complex social amalgam in which
its existe nce as a textual figure was neve r separable from its machinic uses.
What this implies is that the camera obscura must be extricated from the
evolutionary logic of a technological determinism, central to influential historical surveys, which positio n it as a precurso r o r an inaugural event in a
genealogy leading to the birth of photography-' To cite Deleuze again,
"Machines are social befo re being technicaL"" O bviously photography had



Gilles Dele uze and Felix Guauari A Thousand Plateaus.. Capitalism and Schizo7 <mta, trans. Brian Massumi (Minneaplis, 1987 ), 
obs Overwhelmingly, the staning po int of histo ries o f photography is the came ra
as t:as a photographic camera in embryo. The binh of pho tography is then "explained"
See  nunous encounter of this optical device with new discoveries in photochemistry.
, or example H I

 e mutGernsheim,
Josef" '. eaumont Newhall, 7be History of Photography ( New Yo rk, 1964), 
" anaEd H '
and Hei er, zstory ojPhotograpiry, trans. Edward Epste in (New Yo rk, 1945) 
nnch Schwarz, Art a nd Photograplry. Forerunners and Influences (Chicago ,
'
8
.
Gilles Dele uze, Foucault, trans. Sean Hand  


The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

technical and material underpinnings, and the structural principles of the two
devices are dearly not unrelated. I will argue, however, that the camera
obscura and the photographic camera, as assemblages, practices, and social
objects, belong to two fundamentally different organizations of representation and the observer, as well as of the observer's relation to the.visible. By
the beginning of the nineteenth century the camera obscura is no longer syn.
onymous with the production of truth and with an observer positioned to see
truthfully. The regulariry of such statements ends abruptly; the assemblage
constituted by the camera breaks down and the photographic camera
becomes an essentially dissimilar object, lodged amidst a radically different
network of statements and practices.
An historians, predictably, tend to be interested in art objects, and most
of them have thus considered the camera obscura for how it may have determined the formal structure of paintings or prints. Many accounts of the camera
obscura, particularly those dealing with the eighteenth century, tend to consider it exclusively in terms of its use by artists for copying, and as an aid in
the making of paintings. There is often a presumption that artists were making
do with an inadequate substitute for what they really wanted, and which
would soon appear-that is, a photographic camera. Such an emphasis
imposes a set of twentieth-century assumptions, in particular a productivist
logic, onto a device whose primary function was not to generate pictures.
Copying with the camera obscura-that is, the tracing and making permanent
of its image-was only one of its many uses, and even by the mid-eighteenth
century was de-emphasized in a number of important accounts. The article on
"camera obscura" in the Encyclopedie, for example, lists its uses in this order:
Arthur K. Wheelock proposes that the "verisimilitude" of the camera obscura satisfied the naturalistic urges of seventeenth-century Dutch painters who found perspective
too mechanical and abstract. "For Dutch artists, intent on exploring the world about them,
the camera obscura offered a unique means for judging what a truly natural painting should
look like." "Constantijn Huygens and Early Attitudes Towards the camera Obscura," His101J'
of Photography 1, no.. 2 (April 1977), 
tionable notion of a "truly natural" painting, Wheelock assumes that the device allowed:
neutral, unproblematic presenlation of visual "reality." He outlines a process

?f scyh

change, apparently following Gombrich, in which the use of the camera obscura mteract_
With traditional practices and schemas to yield more lifelike images. See PerspectiVe. OptiCS
and Delft Artists, 
33, also asserts that the came ra obscura implied a more truthful image.

--a Qbscura and Its Subject

reat light on the nature of vision; it provides a very diverting 

that
it presents images perfectly resembling their objects; it repretaCIe, tn
the colors and movements of objects better than any other sort of
sents sentation is able to do." Only belatedly does it note that "by means of this
repre
instrument someone who does not know how to draw is able nevertheless to
draW with extreme accuracy. "10 Non instrumental descriptions of the camera
obscura are pervasive, emphasizing it as a self-sufficient demonstration of its
own activity and by analogy of human vision. For those who understood its
optical underpinnings it offered the spectacle of representation operating
completely transparently, and for those ignorant of its principles it afforded
the pleasures of illusion. Just as perspective contained within it the disruptive
possibilities of anamorphoses, however, so the veracity of the camera was
haunted by its proximity to techniques of conjuration and illusion. The magic
lantern that developed alongside the camera obscura had the capacity to
appropriate the setup of the latter and subvert its operation by infusing its interior with reflected and projected images using artificiallight. 11 However, this
counter-deployment of the camera obscura never occupied an effective discursive or social position from which to challenge the dominant model I have
been outlining here.

IO. Encyclopedieoudictionnairedessciences, desartsetdesmetiers,  
pp._62--64. Earlier in !he century john Harris does not mention its use by artists or !he posstblluy of recording !he projected images. Instead he emphasizes its status as a popular
entertainment and a didactic illustration of !he principles of vision. See his Lexicon Techor a Universal English Dictionary ofArts and Sciences  
1755;:: obscura see Charles-Antoine )omben, Methode pour apprrmdre 1e dessein (Paris,
'pp, 137-156.

';';"'m·:

- e work of !he Jesuit priest Athanasius Kircher  and his legendary
m technology is a crucial counter-use of classical optical systems. See his Ars

ma::a

obseiV
et Umbrae  
a Visio er to exterior, Kircher devised techniques for flooding !he inside of!he camera with
sorn.,_;:ry brilliance, using various aniliciallight sources, mirrors, projected images, and
to the Coes translucent gems in place of a lens to simulate divine illumination. In contrast
8et!eraJ =·Reformation background of Kirche r's practices, it's possible to make a very
"Stant sub1._:llon of !he camera obscura with !he inwardness of a modernized and Pro t-uvtty.

7be Camera Obscura and Its SubJea

At the same time one must be wary of conflating the meanings and effects
of the camera obscura with techniques of linear perspective. Obviously the
two are related, but it must be stressed that the camera obscura defines the
position of an interiorized observer to an exterior world, not just to a two.
dimensional representation, as is the case with perspective. Thus the camera
obscura is synonymous with a much broader kind of subject-effect; it is about
far more than the relation of an observer to a certain procedure of picture
making. Many contemporary accounts of the camera obscura single out as its
most impressive feature its representation of movement. Observers frequently spoke with astonishment of the flickering images within the camera
of pedestrians in motion or branches moving in the wind as being more lifelike than the original objeets. 12 Thus the phenomenological differences

between the experience of a pespectival construct,ion and the projection of
the camera obscura are not even comparable. What is crucial about the camera obscura is its relation of the observer to the undemarcated, undifferentiated expanse of the world outside, and how its apparatus makes an orderly
cut or delimitation of that field allowing it to be viewed, without sacrificing
the vitality of its being. But the movement and temporality so evident in the
camera obscura were always prior to the act of representation; movement and
time could be seen and experienced, but never represented.''
Another key misconception about the camera obscura is that it is some·
how intrinsically a "Northern" model of visuality." Svetlana Alpers, in partie·
ular, has developed this position in her insistence that the essential
See, for example, Robert Smith, Compleat System ofOpticks  P·
and John Harris, Lexicon Tecbnicum, 
Classical science in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries extracted "individual
realities from the complex continuum which nourished them and gave them shape. made
them manageable, even intelligible, but always transformed them in essence. Cut off from
those precarious aspects of pheno mena that can only be called their "becoming," that is,
their aleatory and transformative adventure in time including their often extreme sens-

tiviry to secondary, tertiary, stochastic, or merely invisible processes, and cut off as well
from their effective capacities to affect or determine in their tum effects at the heart of these
same processes--the science of nature has excluded time and rendered itself incapable of
thinking change or novelty in and for itself." Sanford Kwinter, Immanence and Event
(forthcoming).
Much speculation about the history of the camera obscura assumes its origins are
Mediterranean-that it was accidentally "discovered" when bright sunlight would enter
through a sntall aperture in shunered windows.

7be camera


Qbscura and Its Subject

. t"cs of seventeenth-century Dutch painting are inseparable from
haractens 1
c
.ence in the North of the camera obscura. 15 Missing, however, from
theelCPen
. ssion is a sense of how the metaphor of the camera obscura as a figherdlscu
e for human vision pervaded all of Europe during the seventeenth century.
ur
, rs to her "Northern descriptive mode" as the "Keplerian mode," based
shere,e

on Kepler's important statements about the camera obscura and the retinal
image. But Kepler (whose optical studies were done in the eclectic and hardly
Northern visual culture of the Prague court of Rudolf II) was merely one of
a number of major seventeenth-century thinkers in whose work the camera
obscura holds a central position, including Leibniz, Descartes, Newton, and
Locke.' Over and above the question of the meanings of Dutch art, it is important to acknowledge the transrultional character of intellectual and scientific
life in Europe during this period, and more specifically the fundamental similarities linking accounts of the camera obscura, whether by rationalists or
empiricists, from diverse parts of Europe. 17
Although she addresses a traditional art historical problem (the style of
Northern versus Italian painting), in the course of her argument Alpers makes
some broad speculations about the historical role of the camera obscura.
While her argument cannot be fully summarized here, she outlines a "descriptive" and empirical mode of seeing, coincident with the experience of the

!5.

Svetlana Alpers, The Art of Describing, Dutch Art in the Seventeenth Century (Chi-

cago, 1983), 
1 ·

A1pers's omission of Descanes's account of vision and the camera obscura in La

'::""trique  is notable, given that Descartes lived in Holland for over twenty years,
. om 1628 to 1649, and that his optical theory was so closely related Kepler's. The sim·
'r_1-&-ona
::ty ofl a Keplerian
and a Cartesian observer tends to undermine the notion of distinct
·
to

cartes; epistemes. On Descartes and Holland see, for example, C. Louise Thijssen, "Le
dau E arusme aux Pays-Bas," in E.]. Dijksterhuis, ed., Descartes et e cartesianisme bollanU. dioptudes et ments  
"-le ,
only confirmed and made more precise" all the important features of
._., rsopllcs. I d'
Jlercepr.
 me u mg the theory of the retinal image, in "A propos de Ia theorie de Ia
8t'ess
suelle chez Kepler et Descartes," in Proceedings ofXIIlth International Con17. In a rstory ofScU!nce, val. 6  
Norm and :lated problem, Erwin Panofsky noted the different uses of perspective in the
and tech . e South, but he leaves no doubt that what these uses have in common as system
'SYfnboliue 15 far more important than regional idiosyncracies. See "Die Perspective als
(English t e Fo rm,"' in Vortrage der Bibliothek Warburg , 
rans. by Christopher S. Wood forthcoming from Zone Books, New York.)

trique

of:


The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

camera obscura, as a permanent "artistic option" in Western art. "It is an Option
or pictorial mode that has been taken up at different times for different reasons and it remains unclear to what extent it should be considered to constitute, in and of itself, a historical development."18 She asserts that "the
ultimate origins of photography do not lie in the fifteenth-century invention
of perspective, but rather in the alternative mode of the North. Seen this way,
one might say that the photographic image, the Dutch art of describing, and
... Impressionist painting are all examples of this constant artistic option in
the art of the West. "19 My aim, on the contrary, is to suggest that what separaJes
photography from both perspective and the camera obscura is far more significant than what they have in common.
While my discussion of the camera obscura is founded on notions of discontinuity and difference, Alpers, like many others, poses notions of both continuity in her lineage of the origins of photography and identity in her idea
of an a priori observer who has perpetual access to these free-floating and
transhistorical options of seeing. 20 If these options are "constant," the
observer in question becomes removed from the specific material and historical conditions of vision. Such an argument, in its reclothing of familiar stylistic polarities, runs the risk of becoming a kind of neo-Wolfflinism.
Standard accounts of the camera obscura routinely give some special
mention of the Neapolitan savant Giovanni Banista della Porta, often identified
as one of its inventors. 21 Such details we will never know for sure, but we do
have his description of a camera obscura in the widely read Magia Naturais
of 1558, in which he explains the use of a concave speculum to insure that the
projected image will not be inverted. In the second edition of 1589, della Porta
details how a concave lens can be placed in the aperture of the camera co produce a much more finely resolved image. But della Porta's significance concerns the intellectual threshold that he straddles, and how his camera obscura


Svetlana Alpers, The Art ofDescribing, 
Alpers, The Art ofDescribing, p . 244, n37.


For an imponant discussion of identity and difference in historical explanation. see

Fredric jameson, "Marxism and Historicism," in The Ideologies of Theory' Essays J97lI986,   
P
See Mario Gliozzi, "L'invenzione della camera oscura," Arcbivio di Storia 
Scienza xiv (April-June 1932), 

11Jecamera

bscWa and Its Subject


an organization of knowledge and seeing that will undermine the
. 30gurates
n .
e science that most of his work exemplifies.22
Renassanc
The natural magic of della Porta was a conception of the world in its funental unity and a means of observing this unity: 'We are persuaded that
dalll
ledge of secret things depends upon the contemplation and the view
the knOW
of the whole world, namely the motion, style and fashion thereof."23 Elsewhere della Porta insists that "one must watch the phenomena with the eyes
of a lynx so that, when observation is complete, one can begin to manipulate
them."" The observer here is ultimately seeking insight into a universal language of symbols and analogies that might be employed in the directing and
harnessing of the forces of nature. But according to Michel Foucault, della
Porta envisioned a world in which all things were adjacent to each other,
linked together in a chain:
In the vast syntax of the world, the different beings adjust themselves to one another, the plant communicates with the animal, the
earth with the sea, man with everything around him.... The relation of emulation enables things to imitate one another from one
end of the universe to the other ... by duplicating itself in a mirror
the world abolishes the distance proper to it; in this way it overcomes the place allotted to each thing. But which of these images
coursing through space are the original images? Which is the reality and which is the projection?"
This interlacing of nature and its representation, this indistinction between
reality and its projection will be abolished by the camera obscura, and instead
it will institute an optical regime that will a priori separate and distinguish
image from object26 In fact della Porta's account of the camera obscura was

!

Della Pona is identified as a "pre-modern" in Robert Lenoble, Histoire de 'idee de
ure (Paris, 1%9), 
Giovan · B .
. m an1sta della Pona, Natural Magick  
Ci
sance ted Itt Eugenio Garin, Italian Humanism: Philosophy and Civic Life in the Renais2S ':ans. Peter Munz (New York, 1965), 
chel Foucault, The Order of Things, 
era ebshould note della Porta's indifference to the real or illusory statuS of what the
and ing; scura makes visible, "Nothing can be more pleasant for great men and Scholars,
may see nous persons to behold; That in a dark Chamber by white sheets objected, o ne
as clearly and perspicuously, as if they were before his eyes, Huntings, Banquets,


Tbe Camera Obscura and Its Subjeq

a key element in Kepler's theoretical formulation of the retinal image." Ernst
Cassirer places della Porta within the Renaissance tradition of magic, in Which
to contemplate an object
means to become one with it. But this unity is only possible if the
subject and the object, the knower and the known, are o'f the same
nature; they must be members and parts of one and the same vital
complex. Every sensory perception is an act of fusion and
reunification. 28
For della Porta's natural magic, the use of the camera obscura was simply one
of a number of methods that allowed an observer to become more fully concentrated on a particular object; it had no exclusive priority as the site or mode
of observation. But to readers of della Porta several decades late r, the camera
obscura seemed to promise an unrivaled and privileged means of observation
that was attained finally at the cost of shattering the Renaissance adjacency of
knower and known.
Beginning in the late 1500s the figure of the camera obscura begins to
assume a preeminent importance in delimiting and defining the relations
between observer and world. Within several decades the camera obscura is
no longer one of many instruments or visual options but instead the compulsory site from which vision can be conceived or represented. Above all it
indicates the appearance of a new model of subjectivity, the hegemony of a
new subject-effect. First of all the camera obscura performs an operation of

Armies of Enemies, Plays and all things else that one desire th. Let there be over againSI that
Chamber, where you desire to represent these things, some spacious Plain, whe re the sun
can freely shine: upon that you shall set trees in O rder, also Woods,lylo untains, Rivers and
Animals that are really so, o r made by Art, of Wood, or some other matter . .. those that are
in the Chamber shall see Trees, Animals, Hunters, Faces, and all the rest so plainly, that th
cannot tell whether they be true or delusions: Swords drawn will glister in at the hole.
Giovanni Battista della Pona, Natural Magick, 
'iSiO"
For the influence of della Pona on Kepler, see David C. Lindberg, 'JbeorieS ofV.
from AJ.[(jntJi to Kepler (Chicago , 1976), 
.
tf31'S·
Ernst Gassirer, 7be Individual and the Cosmos in Renaissance Pbitosophy. RienMario Domandl ( Philade lphia, 1972), 
sua, Giovanni Baltisla della Porta and Renaissana Science (Ph.D. diss., Umve rSII)'
Michigan, 1963).

'[be

ozrnera bscura and Its Subject


Camera obscura. 1646.

individuation; that is, it necessarily defines an observer as isolated, enclosed,
and autonomous within its dark confines. It impels a kind of askesis, or withdrawal from the world, in order to regulate and purify one's relation to the
manifold contents of the now "exterior" world. Thus the camera o bscura is
inseparable from a certain metaphysic of interiority: it is a figure for both the
observer who is nominally a free sovereign individual and a privatized subject
confined in a quasi-domestic space, cut off from a public exterior world. 29
(Jacques Lacan has noted that Bishop Berkeley and others wrote about visual
representations as if they were private property. )30 At the same time, another
related and equally decisive function of the camera was to sunder the act of
seeing from the physical body of the observer, to decorporealize vision. The
monadic viewpoint of the individual is authenticated and legitimized by the
cera obscura, but the observer's physical and sensory experience is supp anted by th
.
.
e re1auons between a mechanical apparatus and a pre-giVen
l 9 · Gear
.
Ckiss Cons g Lukacs descnbes this !ype of artificially isolated individual in History and
ua1 Pri- . =u.sness, 135-138. See also the excellent discussion of inwardness and sexo:Uzauon · th
on S . In e seventeenth century in Francis Barker, Tbe Tremulous Private Body

e..a.vs

Jacqu':[ectron (London. 1984), 
'dan (New 'II Lacan, The Four Fundamentnl Concepts ofPsycho-Analysis, trans. Alan SherOrk, 1978), 



The Camera Obscura and Its SUbJect

world of objective truth. Nietzsche summarizes this kind of thought: "The sen.
ses deceive, reason corrects the errors; consequently, one concluded, reason
is the road to the constant; the least sensual ideas must be closest to the 'true
world. '-It is from the senses that most misfortunes come-they are deceiv.
ers, deluders, destroyers. "31
Among the well-known texts in which we find the image of tht ·camera
obscura and of its interiorized and disembodied subject are Newton's Opticks
 and Locke's Essay on Human Understanding ( 1690). What they jointly
demonstrate is how the camera obscura was a model simultaneously for the
observation of empirical phenomena and for reflective introspection and
self-observation. The site of Newton's inductive procedures throughout his
text is the camera obscura; it is the ground on which his knowledge is made
possible. Near the beginning of the Opticks he recounts:
In a very dark Chamber, at a round hole, about one third Part of an
Inch, broad, made in the shut of a window, I placed a glass prism,
whereby the Beam of the Sun's Light, which came in at that Hole,
might be refracted upwards toward the opposite wall of the chamber, and there form a coloured image of the Sun.3'
The physical activity that Newton describes with the first person pronoun
refers not to the operation of his own vision but rather to his deployment of
a transparent, refractive means of representation. Newton is less the observer
than he is the organizer, the stager of an apparatus from whose actual functioning he is physically distinct. Although the apparatus in question is not
strictly a camera obscura (a prism is substituted for a plane lens or pinhole),
its structure is fundamentally the same: the representation of an exterior phenomenon occurs within the rectilinear confines of a darkened room, a cham·
ber, or, in Locke's words, an "empty cabinet. "33 The two-dimensional plane on
which the image of an exterior presents itself subsists only in its specific rela·
Friedrich Nietzsche, Tbe Will to Power; 
.
rzd
Sir Isaac Newton, Opticks, or a Treatise ofthe Reflections, Refractions, Injlectlons a
Colours of Light, 4th ed. (1730: rpt. NewYork,1952), 
john Locke, An Concerning Human Understanding, ed. Alexander earnPbe,
Fraser (New York, 1959). l,ii, IS. On some of the epistemological implications of Newton 5
work, see Stephen Toulmin, "The Inwardness of Mental Life," Critical Inquiry (Autumn
1979), 

11Je camera

Qbscura and Its Subject


.
ce to an aperture in the wall opposite it. But berween these rwo
. n ofdtstan
.
( point and a plane) is an indeterminate extensive space in which
Jocauons a
r is ambiguously situated. Unlike a perspectival construction,
an observe
. al presumed to represent an objectively ordered representation, the
whtch so
.
.
.
.
bscura did not dictate a restricted stte or area from whtch the Image
camerao
·rs full coherence and consistency.34 On one hand the observer is dispresentS 1
.
, m the pure operation of the device and is there as a disembodied wit1unct,ro
ness to a mechanical and transcendental re-presentation of the objectivity of
the world. On the other hand, however, his or her presence in the camera
implies a spatial and temporal simultaneity of human subjectivity and objective apparatus. Thus the spectator is a more free-floating inhabitant of the
darkness, a marginal supplementary presence independent of the machinery
of representation. As Foucault demonstrated in his analysis of Velasquez's las
Meninas, it is a question of a subject incapable of self-representation as both
subject and object.35 The camera obscura a priori prevents the observer from
seeing his or her position as part of the representation. The body then is a
problem the camera could never solve except by marginalizing it into a phantom in order to establish a space of reason.36 In a sense, the camera obscura
is a precarious figurative resolution of what Edmund Husser! defined as the
major philosophical problem of the seventeenth century: "How a philosophizing which seeks its ultimate foundatio ns in the subjective ... can claim an
objectively 'true' and metaphysically transcendent validity. "37

Perhaps the most famous image of the camera obscura is in Locke'sEssay
Concerning Human Understanding :

External and internal sensations are the only passages that I can
find of knowledge to the understanding. These alone, as far as I can
Hube D .
allowed .n amtsch has stressed that late quanrocento perspectival constructions
ing was a vtewer a limited field of mobility from within which the consistency of the paintl'or;gine";;ntained, rather than from the immobility of a fixed and single point. See his
muntcar· Ia 
tons 38, 1983, 
. Foucault The
Michel F.

wderof7bings, 
0"!:ult.- Beyond Structuralism and HermeneuJicS  
3ctivity., se altleo, Descanes, and "the occultation of the enunciating subject in discursive
Ect e Ttmothy). Reiss, The Discourse ofModernism  
ol unct Busser!, The Crisis ofEuropean Science and Transcendental Pbenomen,
s. DaVid Carr (Evanston, Ill., 1970), 


7be Carru!ra Obscura and Its Stdyeq

discover, are the windows by which light is let into this dark room.
For, methinks, the understanding is not much unlike a closet
wholly shut from light, with only some little opening left ... to let
in external visible resemblances, or some idea of things without;
would the pictures coming into such a dark room but stay there
and lie so orderly as to be found upon occasion it would very much
resemble the understanding of a man.38
An important feature of Locke's text here is how the metaphor of the dark

room effectively distances us from the apparatus he describes. As pan of his
general project of introspection Locke proposes a means of visualizing spatially the operations of the intellect. He makes explicit what was implied in
Newton's account of his activity in his dark chamber: the eye of the observer
is completely separate from the apparatus that allows the entrance and formation of"pictures" or "resemblances." Hume also insisted on a similar relation of distance: "The operations of the mind ... must be apprehended in an
instant by a superior penetration, derived from nature and improved by habit
and reflection. "39
Elsewhere in Locke's text another meaning is given to the idea of the
room, of what it literally meant in seventeenth-century England to be in cam·
era, that is, within the chambers of a judge or person of title. Locke writes that
sensations are conveyed "from without to their audience in the brain- the
mind's presence room, as I may so call it."40 In addition to structuring the act
of observation as the process by which something is observed by a subject,
Locke also gives a new juridical role to the observer within the camera
obscura. Thus he modifies the receptive and neutral function of the apparatus
by specifying a more self-legislative and authoritative function: the camera
obscura allows the subject to guarantee and police the correspondence
Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, II, xi, 17.
David Hume, An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding (1748; New York,
1955), 
Panty, where space is a "nerwork of relations berween objects such as would be seen y
a witness to my vision or by a geometer looking over it and reconstructing it from

the;­

side." "Eye and Mind," 71Je Primacy ofPerception, ed.]ames M. Edie (Evanston, Ill .. 1 If

seeing myse lf," in Four Fundamental Concepts ofPsycho-Analysis, 
Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ll,iii,1 .

71Je camera

bscura and Its Subject


n exterior world and interior representation and to exclude anything
r unruly. Reflective introspection overlaps with a regime of selfdisorder1yo
discipline.
is in this context that Richard Rorty assens that Locke and Descanes
.b an observer fundamentally different from anything in Greek and
descn e
. 1 thought. For Rorty, the achievement of these two thinkers was "the
d
me teva
[·on of the human mind as an inner space in which both pains and clear
concept
and distinct ideas passed in review before an Inner Eye.... The novelty was
the notion of a single inner space in which bodily and perceptual sensations
were objects of quasi-observation. "41
. . . In this sense Locke can be linked with Descanes. In the Second Meditation, Descanes assens that "perception, or the action by which we perceive,
is not a vision .. . but is solely an inspection by the mind."42 He goes on to
challenge the notion that one knows the world by means of eyesight: "It is possible that I do not even have eyes with which to see anything. "43 For Descanes,
one knows the world "uniquely by perception of the mind," and the secure
positioning of the self within an empty interior space is a precondition for
knowing the outer world. The space of the camera obscura, its enclosedness,
its darkness, its separation from an exterior, incarnate Descanes's "I will now
shut my eyes, I shall stop my ears, I shall disregard my senses."« The orderly
and calculable penetration oflight rays through the single opening of the camera corresponds to the flooding of the mind by the light of reason, not the
potentially dangerous clazzlement of the senses by the light of the sun.
There are two paintings by Vermeer in which the paradigm of the
Canesian camera obscura is lucidly represented." Consider The Geographer

be"'ee

- Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror ofNature  
(Mopposmg view, see jo hn W. Yolton, Perceptual Acquaintance from Descartes to Reid
onn';;'polis, 1984), 
tin.gh ene Descanes, The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, 2 vols., trans. john Cot43. am
0:,Raben Stootho ff, and Dugald Murdoch  , 
Descanes, Philosophical Writings, 
M s;nes, Philosophical Writings, 
specular: ISCussion of Vermeer clearly does not engage any o f the extensive an historical
referenc:nabout his possible use of the camera obscura in the making of his pictures (see

or his Pai

footnote I). Did he in fact use one, and if so, how did it affect the makeup
here Withnungs>Wh·l
these are interesting questions for specialists, I am not concerned
th ·
t e

e answers one way or the other. Such investigations tend to reduce the prob-


Vermeer. The Astronomer. 1668.

The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

Vermeer The Geographer. c. 1668-69.



The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

and The Astronomer, both painted around 1668. Each image depicts a solitary
male figure absorbed in learned pursuits within the rectangular confines of
a shadowy interior, an interior punctured apparently by only a single window.
The astronomer studies a celestial globe, mapped out with the constellations;
the geographer has before him a nautical map. Each has his eyes averted from
the aperture that opens onto the outside. The exterior world is knowrt not by
direct sensory examination but through a mental survey of its "clear and distinct" representation within the room. The somber isolation of these meditative scholars within their walled interiors is not in the least an obstacle to
apprehending the world o utside, for the division between interiorized subject and exterior world is a pre-given condition of knowledge about the latter.
The paintings then are a consummate demonstration of the reconciling functio n of the camera o bscura: its interior is the interface between Descartes's
absolutely dissimilar res cogitans and. res extensa, between observe r and
world.46 The camera, or room, is the site within which an orderly projection
of the world, of extended substance, is made available for inspection by the
mind. The production of the camera is always a projection onto a two-dimensional surface-here maps, globes, charts, and images. Each of the thinkers,
in a rapt stillness, po nders that crucial feature of the world, its exte nsion, so
mysteriously unlike the unextended immediacy of their own tho ughts yet rendered intelligible to mind by the clarity of these re presentations, by their magnitudinal relations. Rather than opposed by the objects of their study, the earth
and the heavens, the geographer and the astronomer engage in a common
enterprise of observing aspects of a single indivisible exterior.47 Both of them

lem of the camera obscura to one of optical effects and utlimately painterly style. I contend
that the camera obscura must be unde rstood in terms of how it defined the positio n and
possibilities of an observing subject; it was not simply a pictorial or stylistic optio n, o ne
choice among others for a neutral and ahistorical subject. Even if Vermeer never touched

the mechanical apparatus of the camera obscura and other factors explain his halation o f
highlights and accentuated perspective, his paintings are nonetheless profoundly embed·
ded in the larger epistemological model of the camera.
The affinity between Vermeer and cartesian thought is discussed in Michel Serres,
lA Traduction  
Descartes rejected the scholastic distinction between a sublunary o r te rrestrial
world and a qualitatively diffe rent ce lestial realm in his Principles ofPhilosophy, first pub-

The Camera Obscura and Its Subject


(and it may well be the same man in each painting) are figures for a primal
and sovereign inwardness, for the autonomous individual ego that has appropriated to itself the capacity for intellectually mastering the infinite existence
of bodies in space.
Descartes's description of the camera obscura in his La dioptrique
 contains some unusual features. Initially he makes a conventional analogy between the eye and the camera obscura:
Suppose a chamber is shut up apart from a single hole, and a glass
lens is placed in front of this hole with a white sheet stretched at
a certain distance behind it so the light coming from objects outside forms images on the sheet. Now it is said that the room represents the eye; the hole the pupil; the lens the crystalline
humour..


But before proceeding further, Descartes advises his reader to conduct ademonstration involving "taking the dead eye of a newly dead person (or, failing
that, the eye of an ox or some other large animal)" and using the extracted eye
as the lens in the pinhole of a camera obscura. Thus for Descartes the images
observed within the camera obscura are formed by means of a disembodied
cyclopean eye, detached from the observer, possibly not even a human eye.
Additionally, Descartes specifies that one
cut away the three surrounding membranes at the back so as to
expose a large part of the humour without spilling any.... No light
must enter this room except what comes through this eye, all of
whose parts you know to be entirely transparent. Having done this,
if you look at the white sheet you will see there, not perhaps without pleasure and wonder, a picture representing in natural perspective all the objects outside. 49
lished in Holland in 1644. "Similarly, the earth and the heavens are composed of one and
the same matter; and there cannot be a plurality of worlds.·· The Philosophical Writings of
Descartes, 
4B. Descartes, The Philosophical Writings of Descartes, 
Descartes, The Philosophical Writings, 


The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

By this radical disjunction of eye from observer and its installation in this formal apparatus of objective representation, the dead, perhaps even bovine eye
undergoes a kind of apotheosis and rises to an incorporeal status. so If at the
core of Descartes's method was the need to escape the uncertainties of mere
human vision and the confusions of the senses, the camera obscura ill congruent with his quest to found human knowledge on a purely objective view
of the world. The aperture of the camera obscura corresponds to a single,
mathematically definable point, from which the world can be logically
deduced by a progressive accumulation and combination of signs. It is a
device embodying man's position between God and the world. Founded on
laws of nature (optics) but extrapolated to a plane outside of nature, the camera obscura provides a vantage point onto the world analogous to the eye of
God. 5 1 It is an infallible metaphysical eye more than it is a "mechanical" eye.52
Sensory evidence was rejected in favor of the representations of the monocular apparatus, whose authenticity was beyond doubt. 53 Binocular disparity
is bound up in the physiological operation of human vision, and a monocular
device precludes having to theoretically reconcile the dissimilar, and thus
SO.
See the chapter "L'oeil de boeu[ Descartes et l'apres-coup ideologique," in Sarah
Kofman, Camera obscura de 1'deologie, 
SL
Classical science privileges a descriptio n as o bjeaive "to the extent that the observer
is excluded and the description is made from a point lying de jure outside the world, that
is, from the divine viewpoint to which the human soul, created as it was in God's image,
had access at the beginning. Thus classical science still aims at discovering the unique truth
about the world, the one language that will decipher the whole of nature." Jlya Prigogine
and Isabelle Stengers, Order Out of Chao& Mans New Dialogue with Nature (New York,
1984), 
On Descartes's fear of the distorting power of perspeaive, see Karsten Harries, "Descartes, Perspective, and the Atlgelic Eye," Yale French Studies no. 49 (I 973 ), 
also Paul Ricoeur, "The Question of the Subjea. The Challenge of Semiology," in his 7be
Conflict of Interpretations, trans. Don lhde (Evanston, Ill., 1974), 
thought, for Ricoeur, "is contemporaneous with a vision of the world in which the whole
of objeaivity is spread out like a spectacle on which the cogito casts its sovereign gaze" (p.
236).
The rheological dimension of monocularity is suggested in Daniel Defoe, 7be Consolidator.- or, Memoirs ofsundry transactions.from the world in the moon (London, 1705 ),
p . 57 "A generation have risen up, who to solve the difficulties of supernatural systems,
imagine a mighty vast something who has no form but what represents him to them as one
Great Eye. This infinite Optik they imagine to be Natura Naturans .. . the soul of man therefore, in the opinion of these nalUralisrs, is one vast Optik Power .. . From hence they resolve
all Beings to Eyes."

The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

_<;_- ---- ------- - ---

=--" .

A.,.._==::...:_.....JL:.'c._ .

-c.--- --- -- - --- ---·-

Comparison of eye and camera 0Jscura. t:.arty etgmeentb century.


so

The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

provisional, images presented to each eye. Descanes assumed that the pineal
gland exercised a crucial monocular power: "There must necessarily be some
place where the two images coming through the eyes ... can come together
in a single image or impression before reaching the soul, so that they do not
present to it two objects instead of one."S4 At the same time, Descanes's
instructions about removing the ocular membranes from the body of the eye
is an operation ensuring the primal transparency of the camera obscura, of
escaping from the latent opacity of the human eye.
But perhaps it is misleading to pose the vantage point of the camera as
fully analogous to a divine eye. It is imponant that the camera obscura be
understood within the context of a distinctly post-Copernican framework,
within a world from which an absolutely privileged point had vanished and
in which "visibility became a contingent fact. "55 It is Leibniz, along with Pascal,
for whom the loss of such a point is a central problem. At the core ofLeibniz's
thought was the goal of reconciling the validity of universal truths with the
inescapable fact of a world consisting of multiple points of view. The monad
became, for Leibniz, an expression of a fragmented and decentered world, of
the absence of an omniscient point of view, of the fact that every position
implied a fundamental relativity that was never a problem for Descanes. At the
same time, however, Leibniz insisted that each monad had the capacity to
reflect in itself the whole universe from its own finite viewpoint. The conceptual structure of the camera obscura is a parallel reconciliation of a limited
(or monadic) viewpoint and, at the same time, necessary truth.
Tbe Philosophical Writings of Descartes, 
monocularity is one of the many Western codes and procedures through which reality is
constituted according to organized constants. He o utlines a visual world that is subjected
to continual "correction ," "flattening," and elimination of irregularities in order for a uni-

fied space to emerge. See Discours, Figure  esp. 
Hans Blumenberg, TbelegitimacyoftheModemAge, trans. RobenM. 
berween God and man, an idea characteristic of Renaissance Neoplatonism.... The fact
that man has been expelled from the center of the universe in no way impedes faith in this
alliance. De revolutionibus never speaks of this as a humiliation, and later Kepler never
stopped praising the decentering of the eanh: its orbit was for him the best possible vantage point for viewing the universe." Fernand Hallyn, Tbe Poetic Structure of the World:
Copernicus and Kepler, trans. Donald Leslie (New York, 1990), 

The Camera Obscura aruilts Subject


Leibniz, writing around 1703, seems generally to have accepted Locke's
model of the camera obscura, but with the pivotal distinction that it is not a
passive, receiving device but is endowed with an inherent capacity for structuring the ideas it receives:
To increase this resemblance [between observer and dark room)
we should have to postulate that there is a screen in this dark room
to receive the species, and that it is not uniform but is diversified
by folds representing items of innate knowledge; and, what is
more, that this screen or membrane, being under tension, has a
kind of elasticity or active force, and indeed that it acts (or reacts)
in ways which are adapted both to past folds and to new ones.s6
For Leibniz the camera obscura as an optical system was defined by its functional relation to a cone of vision, in which the point of the cone defined the
monadic point of view. As Michel Serres has demonstrated at length:
The science of conic sections shows that there exists a single point
from which an apparent disorder can be organized into a
harmony.... For a given plurality, for a given disorder there only
exists one point around which everything can be placed in order;
this point exists and it is unique. From anywhere else disorder and
indetermination remain. From then on, to know a plurality of
things consists in discovering the point from which their disorder
can be resolved, uno intuito, into a unique law of order. 57
The relation to a cone of rays is what distinguishes monadic perception from
the divine point of view, which would be more properly a cylinder of rays. For
Leibniz, "The difference between the appearance of a body for us and for God
is the difference between scenography and ichnography" (that is, between

G. W. Leibniz, New Essays on Human Understanding , trans. Peter Remnant
and jonathan Bennett  
obscura in relation to baroque architecture: "The monad is the autonomy of the interior,
an interior without exterior." In Le pli.· Leibniz et e Baroque  
Michel Serres, Le Systeme de Leibniz et ses trii:Jdees mathematiques . vol.




The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

perspective and a bird's-eye view).S8 One of the most vivid examples of this
scenographic perspective is in the Monadology:
just as the same city regarded from different sides offers quite different aspects, and thus appears multiplied by the perspective, so
it also happens that the infinite multitude of simple substances ere- ,
ates the appearance of as many different universes. Yet they are but
perspectives of a single universe, varied according to the points of
view, which differ in each monad-'9
One could consider two essentially different approaches to the representation of a city as models ofLeibniz's distinction between scenography and ichnography. On one hand, jacopo de' Barbari's View of Venice from 1500
exemplifies a pre-Copernican, synoptic and totalizing apprehensio n of the
city as a unified entity. 60 It is a view completely outside the epistemological and
technological conditions of the camera obscura. On the other hand, the mideighteenth century views of Venice by Canaletto, for example, disclose a field
occupied by a monadic observer, within a city that is knowable only as the
accumulation of multiple and diverse points of view6 ' The career of Canaletto
was bound up in a discipline of the scenographic; he was trained as a stage
designer, was preoccupied with the theatricality of the city, and made use of
the camera obscura6 2 Whether it is a question of the stage, urban design, or
visual imagery, the intelligibility of a given site depends on a precisely spec58.
Letter to des Bosses, Feb. 5, 1712, quoted in Serres, LeSysteme de Leibniz, vol. I, p.
I 53. Louis Marin discusses the relation between ichnographic representation and royal
power in Portrait of the King, trans. Martha Houle  
G. W. Leibniz, Monadology and Other Philosophical Essays, trans. Paul Schrecker
 
For an important discussion of this image seejuergen Schulz, ')acopo de' Barbari's
View of Venice, Map Making, City Views, and Moralized Geography Before the Year 1500,"
A11 Bulletin 60 , 
'The baroque city, on the contrary, presents itself as an open texrure without reference to a privileged signifier that gives it orientation and meaning." Severo Sarduy, Bar-

raco  

For Canaletto's use of the camera obscura, see Terisio Pignatti, I quaderno di diseqni del Canaetto aile Galerie di Venezia  
aletto: una Venezia immaginaria, vol. I  
and). G. Unks, Canaetto, val. I  

1be Camera Obscura and Its Subject


jacopo de' Barbari. View of Venice (detail). 1500.

ified relation between a delimited point of view and a tableau 6 3 The camera
obscura, with its monocular apenure, became a more perfect terminus for a
cone of vision, a more perfect incarnation of a single point than the awkward
binocular body of the human subject. The camera, in a sense, was a metaphor
for the most rational possibilities of a perceiver within the increasingly
dynamic disorder of the world.
Helene Leclerc insists that by the mid-seventeenth century, beginning with the
career of Bernini, a related concept of scenography traverses theatre, urban design, architecture, and visual imagery, in "La Scene d'illusion etl'hegemonie du theatre a l'italienne,"
in Histoire des Spectacles, ed. Guy Dumur  


7be Camera Obscura and Its Subject

Antonio Canaletto. Piazza San Marco, looking east from tbe nottbwest corner c. 1755

The Camera Obscura and Its Subject


Although Bishop Berkeley's work on vision does not discuss the camera
obscura, his model of perception coincides with that presupposed by the camera. In The Theory ofVision Vindicated , he demonstrates his familiarity
with contemporary treatises on perspective:
We may suppose a diaphanous plain erected near the eye, perpendicular to the horizon, and divided into small equal squares. A
straight line from the eye to the utmost limit of the horizon, passing
through this diaphanous plain, as projected or represented in the
perpendicular plain, would rise. The eye sees all the pans and
objects in the horizontal plain through certain corresponding
squares of the perpendicular diaphanous phrase.... It is true this
diaphanous plain, and the images supposed to be projected
thereon, are altogether of a tangible nature: But then there are pictures relative to those images: and those pictures have an order
among themselves."'
Even though the architectural enclosure of the camera obscura is absent, the
observer here is still one who observes a projection onto a field exterior to
himself, and Berkeley explicitly describes the ordered surface of this field as
a grid on which the universal grammar, "the language of the Author of nature,"
could be known. But whether it is Berkeley's divine signs of God arrayed on
a diaphanous plane, Locke's sensations "imprinted" on a white page, or Leibniz's elastic screen, the eighteenth-century observer confronts a unified space
of order, unmodified by his or her own sensory and physiological apparatus,
on which the contents of the world can be studied and compared, known in
terms of a multitude of relationships. In Rorty's words, "It is as if the tabula
rasa were perpetually under the gaze of the unblinking Eye of the Mind .
it becomes obvious that the imprinting is of less interest than the observation
of the imprint- all the knowing gets done, so to speak, by the Eye which
observes the imprinted tablet, rather than by the tablet itself. "65
For Heidegger, Descanes's work inaugurates "the age of the world picture," but the picture to which Heidegger refers does not imply a new priority
George Berkeley, The Theory of Vision Vindicated, in The Works ofGeorge Berkeley
Bishop ofCoyne, ed. A. A Luce and T. E.Jessop (London, 1948-1957), 
Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror ofNature, 


The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

given to the sense of vision. Rather, "what belongs to the essence of the picture
is standing-together, system . . . a unity that develops out of the projection of
the objectivity of whatever is."66 This is the same unity of the camera obscura,
a field of projection corresponding to the space of Descartes's mathesis universalis, in which all objects of thought, "irrespective of subject matter," can.be
ordered and compared: "Our project being, not to inspect the isolated natures
of things, but to compare them with each other so that some may be known
on the basis of others.''67
The unity of this ground on which everything may be arranged in common finds one of its fullest expressions in the pages of the Encyclopedie.
According to Michel Foucault, the great project of this thought is an exhaustive
ordering of the world characterized by "discovery of simple elements and
their progressive combination; and at their center they form a table on which
knowledge is displayed contemporary with itself. The center of knowledge in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is the table. "68 Ernst Cassirer's reading of the Enlightenment, though unfashionable now, more than echoes certain parts of Foucault's construction of"classical thought." While much AngloAmerican intellectual history tends to pose an atomization of cognition in this
period, Cassirer sees a Leibnizian underpinning to eighteenth-century
thought:
With the advent of the eighteenth-century the absolutism of the
unity principle seems to lose its grip and to accept some limitations
or concessions. But these modifications do not touch the core of
the thought itself. For the function of unification continues to be
recognized as the basic role of reason. Rational order and control
of the data of experience are not possible without strict unificatio n.
To "know" a manifold of experience is to place its component parts
in such a relationship to one another that, starting from a given
point, we can run through them according to a constant and gen-

Manin Heidegger, "The Age of the World Picture," in The Question Concerning Tech·
nology and Other Essays, trans. William Lovitt (New York, 1977), 
Descartes, "Rules forthe Direction of the Mind," in Philosophical Writings, 
Miche l Foucault, The Order of7bings (New York, 1970), 
the table, see Gilles Deleuze, Le pli, 

The Camera Obscura and Its Subject


era! rule ... the unknown and the known participate in a "common
nature."69

Cassirer might well have agreed with Foucault that observation in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is "a perceptible knowledge."70 But it is
hardly a knowledge that is organized exclusively around visuality. Although
the dominance of the camera obscura paradigm does in fact imply a privilege
given to vision, it is a vision that is a priori in the service of a nonsensory faculty
of understanding that alone gives a true conception of the world. It would be
completely misleading to pose the cameq obscura as an early stage in an
ongoing autonomization and specialization of vision that continues into the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Vision can be privileged at different historical moments in ways that simply are not continuous with one another. Situating subjectivity within a monolithic Western tradition of scopic or specular
power effaces and subsumes the singular and incommensurable procedures
and regimes through which an observer has been constituted. 71
For example, Berkeley's theory of perception is based on the essential
dissimilarity of the senses of vision and touch, but this insistence on the heterogeneity of the senses is remote from nineteenth-century notions of the
autonomy ofvision and the separation of the sensesn Berkeley is hardly alone
Ernst Cassirer, The Philosophy ofthe Enlightenment, trans. Fritz KoeHn and james P.
Pettegrove (Princeton, 1951 ), 
menJ, trans. john Cumming (New York, 1979). For them, the quantitative "unity" of
Enlightenment thought was continuous with and a precondition for the technocratic dom-


ination of the twentieth cemury. "In advance, the Enlightenment recognized as being and

occurrence only what can be apprehended in unityo its ideal is the system from which all
and everything follows. Its rationalist and empiricist versions do not pan company on that
point. Even though the individual schools may interpret the axioms differently, the struc·
ture of scientific unity has always been the same. . . . The multiplicity of forms is reduced
to position and arrangement, history to fact, things to matter" (
Foucault, The Order of Things, 
and Diderot, see Suzanne Ge.arhan, Open Boundary of Fiction and History' A Critical
Approach to the French Enlightenment  
See 
 
Anglo-American criticism often tends to posit a continuous development of eighteenth-century thought into nineteenth-century empiricism and associationism. A typical
account is Maurice Mandelbaum, History, Man and Reason, A Study in Nineteenth Century
7bought (Baltimore, 1971, especially 

The Came.ra Obscura and Its Subject


in the eighteenth century in his concern with achieving a fundamental harmonization of the senses, in which a key model for visual perception is the
sense of touch. The Molyneux problem, which so preoccupied the thought of
the eighteenth century, poses the case of a perceiver who is ignorant of one
of the languages of the senses, namely sight. The best known formulation of
the problem is Locke's:

Suppose a man born blind, and now adult, and taught by his touch
to distinguish between a cube and a sphere of the same metal, and
nighly of the same bigness, so as to tell, when he felt one and the
other, which is the cube, which the sphere. Suppose then the cube
and sphere placed on a table, and the blind man be made to see:
quaere, whether by his sight before he touched them, he could now
distinguish and tell which is the globe, which the cube?73
But regardless of how the problem was ultimately answered, whether the
claim was nativist or empiricist, the testimony of the senses constituted for the
eighteenth century a common surface of order." The problem quite simply
was how the passage from one order of sense perception to another took

the thought of Locke, Condillac, and Hanley and nineteenth·century associationism, Mandelbaum concedes, "Thus, in its origins, associationism was not what james Mill and Alex-

ander Bain later sought to make of it, a full-blown psychological system, serving to classify
and relate all aspects of mental life; it was, rather, a principle used to connect a general
epistemological position with more specific issues of intellectual and practical concern.
Among these issues, questions concerning the foundations of morality and the relations of

morality to religion had an especially imponant place" (p. I 56). However, what Mandel·
baum terms "a general epistemological position" is precisely the relative unity of Enlightenment knowledge o nto which he imposes the separations and categories of the thought
of his own time. Religion, morality and epistemology did not exist as discrete and separate
domains.

John Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, II, ix, 8.
For example, see Thomas Reid, Essays on the Powers of the Human Mind [I 785 I
 , 
point so evident, we might observe, that if the faculty of seeing were in the eye, that of hearing in the ear, and so of the other senses, the necessary consequence of this would be, that
the thinking principle, which I call myself, is not one but many. But this is contrary to the
irresistable conviction of every man. When I say, I see, I hear, I feel, I reme mber, this implies
that it is one and the same self that performs all these operations."

The Camera Obscura and Its Subject


place. 75 Or for Condillac, in his famed discussion of the senses coming to life
one by one in his statue, the problem was how the senses could "reconvene,"
that is, come together in the perceiver.76
But for those whose answers to Molyneux were, in one way or another,
negative-a blind man suddenly restored with sight would not immediately
recognize the objects before him-and these included Locke, Berkeley,
Diderot, Condillac, and others, they share little with the physiologists and psychologists of the nineteenth century who were also, with greater scientific
authority, to answer the question negatively. By insisting that knowledge, and
specifically knowledge of space and depth, is built up out of an orderly accumulation and cross-referencing of perceptions on a plane independent of the
viewer, eighteenth-century thought could know nothing of the ideas of pure
visibility to arise in the nineteenth century. Nothing could be more removed
from Berkeley's theory of how distance is perceived than the science of the
stereoscope. This quintessentially nineteenth-century device, with which tangibility (or relief) is constructed solely through an organization of optical
cues (and the amalgamation of the observer into a component of the apparatus), eradicates the very field on which eighteenth-century knowledge
arranged itself.
From Descartes to Berkeley to Diderot, vision is conceived in terms of
analogies to the senses oftouch.n Diderot's work will be misunderstood if we
do not see at the outset how deeply ambivalent he was toward vision, and how
he resisted treating any phenomenon in terms of a single sense.78 His Letters
on the Blind , in its account of Nicholas Saunderson, a blind mathematician, asserts the possibility of a tactile geometry, and that touch as well as
sight carries with it the capacity for apprehending universally valid truths. The
See Cassirer, TfJe Philosophy oftbe EnlightenmenJ, p . 108. For recent discussions of
the problem, see M. J. Morgan, Molyneux's Question, Vision, Touch and tbe Pbilosoby of
Perception ; and Francine Markovits, "Menan, Diderot et l'aveugle," in
J-B. Merian, Sur le probteme de Molyneux  
Etienne de Condillac, "Traite des sensations" , in Oeuvres philosophiques de
Condillac, ed. Georges LeRoy (Paris, 1947-1951).
See Michel Serres, Hermes ou Ia communication  
Maurice Merleau-Ponty, 7be Primacy ofPerception, ed. james M. Edie (Evanston, Jll., 1964 ),

On Diderot's attitude toward the senses, see Elisabeth de Fontenay, Diderot, Reason
and Resonance, trans. jelfrey Mehlman (New York, 1982), 


The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

essay is not so much a depreciation of the sense of vision as it is a refutation
of its exclusivity. Diderot details Saunderson's devices for calculation and
demonstration, rectangular wooden boards with built-in grids marked out by
raised pins. by connecting the pins with silk threads Saunderson's fingers
could trace out and read an infinity of figures and their relations, all calculable
by their location on the demarcated grid. Here the cartesian table appea!"s in
another form, but its underlying status is the same. The certainty of knowledge
did not depend solely on the eye but on a more general relation of a unified
human sensorium to a delimited space of order on which positions could be
known and compared.79 In a sighted person the senses are dissimilar, but
through what Diderot calls "reciprocal assistance" they provide knowledge
about the world.
Yet despite this discourse on the senses and sensation, we are still within
the same epistemological field occupied by the camera obscura and its overriding of the immediate subjective evidence of the body. Even in Diderot, a
so-called materialist, the senses are conceived more as adjuncts of a rational
mind and Jess as physiological organs. Each sense operates according to an
immutable semantic logic that transcends its mere physical mode of functioning. Thus the significance of the image discussed in Diderot's Letters on
the Blind: a blindfolded man in an outdoor space steps forward , tentative ly
holding a stick in each hand, extended to feel the objects and area before him.
But paradoxically this is not an image of a man literally blind; rather it is an
abstract diagram of a fully sighted observer, in which vision operates like the
sense of touch. just as the eyes are not finally what see, however, so the carnal
organs of touch are also disengaged from contact with an exterior world. Of
this blind and prosthesis-equipped figure that illustrated Descartes's lA dioptrique Diderot remarks, "Neither Descartes no r those who have followed him
have been able to give a clearer conception of vision.""' This anti-optical

On the persistence of Cartesian ism in Enlightenment thought, see Aram Vartanian,
Diderot and Descartes, A Study ofScientific Naturalism in the Enlightenment (Princeton,
1953).
Diderot assertS that the person most capable of theorizing on vision and the senses
would be "a philosopher who had profoundly meditated on the subjea in the dark, o r to
adopt the language of the poets, one who had put out his eyes in order to be better
acquainted with vision." Lettres sur es aveuges, in Oeuvres phiosophiques, 

The Camera Obscura and Is Subject

11ustrationfrom 1724 edition ofDescartes's lA dioptrique.



The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

notion of sight pervaded the work of other thinkers during both the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries: for Berkeley there is no such thing as visual
perception of depth, and Condillac's statue effectively masters space with the
help of movement and to uch. The notion of vision as touch is adequate to a
field of knowledge whose contents are organized as stable positions within
an extensive terrain. But in the nineteenth century such a notion became
incompatible with a field organized around exchange and flux, in which a
knowledge bound up in touch would have been irreconcilable with the centrality of mobile signs and commodities whose identity is exclusively optical.
The stereoscope, as I will show, became a crucial indication of the remapping
and subsumption of the tactile within the optical.
The paintings of ].-B. Chardin are lodged within these same questions
of knowledge and perception. His still lifes, especially, are a last great presentation of the classical object in all its ple nitude, before it is sundered irrevocably into exchangeable and ungrounded signifiers or into the painterly
traces of an autonomous vision. The slow-burning glow of Chardin's late
work, an effulgence inseparable from use values, is a light soon to be eclipsed
in the nineteenth century, either by the synthetic aura of the commodity o r by
the radiance of an artWo rk whose very survival demanded a denial of its mere
objectivity. In his still-lifes, with their shallow, stage-like ledges populated with
forms, to know something was not to beho ld the o ptical singularity of an
object but to apprehend its fuller phenomenal identity simultaneously with
its position on an ordered field. The aesthetic imperative by which Chardin
systematizes the simple forms of everyday use and of sensory experience is
close to Diderot's insistence on representing nature in its variability and flux,
while at the same time deriving from that shifting knowledge universally valid
ideas.a'
Take, for example, Chardin's Basket of Wild Strawberries from around
His superb cone of stacked strawberries is a sign of how rational knowledge of geometrical form can coincide with a perceptual intuition of the multiplicity and perishability of life. For Chardin, sensory knowledge and rational
knowledge are inseparable. His work is both the product of empirical know!81.

See Diderot,I.e Reve de D'Aiembert, in Oeuvres pbilosophiques, 

The Camera Obscura and Its Subject


f.-B. Cbardin. Basket of Wild Strawbe rries. 1761.

edge about the contingent specificity of forms, their position within a wo rld
of social meanings, and at the same time an ideal structure founded o n a
deductive rational clarity. But the immediacy of sense experience is transposed to a scenic space within which the re lation o f one object to anothe r has
less to do with sheer optical appearances than with knowledge of isomorphisms and positio ns o n a unifie d terrain. It is in the context of the Cartesian
table that we should read Chardin's enumerative clarity, his groupings o f
objects into sets and subsets. These formal analogies are not about a surface
design, but rather a permanent space across which are distributed "the no nquantitative identitie s and diffe re nces that separate d and united things. "02

Foucault, The Order of7bings, 


The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

Chardin's painting is also part of the eighteenth-century preoccupation
with ensuring transparency over opacity. Newtonian and Cartesian physics,
notwithstanding the large divide between them, both sought to confirm the
unity of a single homogeneous field in spite of the diversity of media and possibilities of refraction within it. Dioptrics (science of refraction) was of greater
interest to the eighteenth century than catoptrics (reflection), and this predeliction is most obviously evident in Newton's Dpticks83 It was crucial that
the distorting power of a medium, whether a lens, air, or liquid, be neutralized, and this could be done if the properties of that medium were mastered
intellectually and thus rendered effectively transparent through the exercise
of reason. In Chardin's Boy Blowing Bubbles, from around 1739, a glass filled
with dull soapy liquid stands at one side of a shallow ledge, while a youth with
a straw transforms that formless liquid opacity into the transparent sphere of
a soap bubble situated symmetrically over the rectilinear ledge. This depicted
act of effortless mastery, in which vision and touch work cooperatively (and
this occurs in many of his images), is paradigmatic of Chardin's own activity
as an artist. His apprehension of the coidentity of idea and maner and their
finely set positions within a unified field discloses a thought for which haptic
and optic are not autonomous terms but together constitute an indivisible
mode of knowledge.
Thus the flickering heaviness of the atmosphere in Chardin's mature
work is a medium in which vision performs like the sense of touch, passing
through a space of which no fraction is empty.84 Far from being an airless Newtonian realm, the world of Chardin's art is adjacent to a Cartesian science of
a corpuscular, maner-filled reality in which there is no void, no action at a distance. And if the apocryphal stories of Chardin painting with his fingers are to
be put to use, it should not be in the service of privileging timeless "painterly"

On the modernity of dioptrics, see Molyneux, Dioptrica nova, 
denies the ancients the knowledge of catoptricks . ·.. yet certainly Optick-Giasses are a
m<Xtem invention."

See Diderot, Oeuvres eslbetiques, ed. Paul Vemiere  
Joseph Addison, The Spectator, ed. Donald F. Bond  no. 411,June 21, 1712:
"Our sight . . . may be considered as a more delicate and diffusive Kind of Touch, that
spreads its self over an infinite Multitude of Bodies."

The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

.-B. Chardin. Boy Blowing Bubbles. 1739.


The Camera Obscura and Its Subject

values but rather to underscore the primacy of a vision, belonging to a specific
historical moment, in which tactility was fully embedded.85
Chardin is at a vast remove from an artist like Cezanne. If Chardin is
understandable in the context of the Molyneux problem and the coordination
of sensory languages, Cezanne implies not just the possibility of achieving the
state of a blind man suddenly restored to sight, but more importantly of retaining this "innocence" permanently. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries this kind of "primordial" vision simply could not be thought, even as a
hypothetical possibility. In all the speculation surrounding the 1728 case of
the Chesleden boy, no one was ever to suggest that a blind person restored
to sight would initially see a luminous and somehow self-sufficient revelation
of colored patches. 86 Instead, that inaugural moment of vision was a void that
could not be spoken of or represented, because it was empty of discourse and
thus of meaning. Vision for the newly sighted person took shape when words,
uses, and locations could be assigned to objects. If Cezanne, Ruskin, Monet,
or any other artist of the nineteenth cenrury is able to conceive of an "innocence of the eye," it is only because of a major reconfiguration of the observer
earlier in that cenrury.
See the discussion of Chardin's technique in Norman Bryson, Word and !magee
French Painting of the Ancien Regime  
between Rembrandt's touch and cartesian optics, see Svetlana Alpers, Rembrandt's Enterprisec 7be Studio and the Market  
reciprocal relation between vision and touch in Chardin as a model of sensory attentiveness can be related to Michael Fried's notion of absorption articulated in his groundbreaking Absorption and Tbeatricalityc Painting and Beholder in the Age of Diderot
.
In 1728 the surgeon Cheselden performed a successful cataract operation on a fourteen-year-old boy blind from birth. See Diderot, Lettres sur ksaveugks, 
ley, 1beory of Vision Vindicated, sec. 71. See also Jeffrey Mehlman, CalaractcA Study in
Diderot (Middletown, Conn., 1979).

3

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

To admit untruth as a condition
of life--this does indeed imply a terrible negation of the customary
valuations.

-Friedrich Nietzsche
Being composed of a plurality of
irreducible forces the body is a multiplicity, its unity is that of a multiple phenomenon, a "unity of
domination. "

-Gilles Deleuze
One of the opening paragraphs of Goethe's Farbenlehre (181 O) begins
with the following account:
Let a room be made as dark as possible; let there be a circular opening in the window shutter about three inches in diameter, which
may be closed or not at pleasure. The sun being suffered to shine
through this on a white surface, let the spectator from some little
distance fix his eyes on this bright circle thus admitted.'

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, TbeoryofColours, trans. Charles Easdake (1840; Cambridge, Mass., 1970), 


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

Goethe, following a long established practice, has made a camera obscura the
site of his optical studies. Again, much as it had in Newton's Opticks, the dark
room seems to establish categorical relations between interior and exterior,
between light source and apenure, and between observer and object. As
Goethe continues his recitation, however, he abruptly and stunningly abandons the order of the camera obscura:
The hole being then closed, let him look towards the darkest pan
of the room; a circular image will now be seen to float before him.
The middle of the circle will appear bright, colourless, or somewhat yellow, but the border will appear red. After a time this red,
increasing towards the centre, covers the whole circle, and at last
the bright central point. No sooner, however, is the whole circle
red than the edge begins to be blue, and the blue gradually
encroaches inwards on the red. When the whole is blue the edge
becomes dark and colourless. The darker edge again slowly
encroaches on the blue till the whole circle appears colourless..
Goethe's instruction to seal the hole, "Man schliesse darauf die Offnung,"
announces a disordering and negation of the camera obscura as both an optical system and epistemological figure. The closing off of the opening dissolves the distinction between inner and outer space on which the very
functioning of the camera (as apparatus and paradigm) depended. But it is
now not simply a question of an observer repositioned in a sealed interior to
view its panicular contents; the optical experience described here by Goethe
presents a notion of vision that the classical model was incapable of
encompassing.
The colored circles that seem to float, undulate, and undergo a sequence
of chromatic transformations have no correlative either within o r without the
dark room; as Goethe explains at length, they are "physiological" colors
belonging entirely to the body of the observer and are "the necessary conditions of vision."
Let the observer look steadfastly on a small coloured object and let
it be taken away after a time while his eyes remain unmoved; the

Goethe, Theory of Colours, 

Sul?fective Vision and the Separation of the Senses


spectrum of another colour will then be visible on the white plane
... it arises from an image which now belongs to the eye. 3
The corporeal subjectivity of the observer, which was a priori excluded from
the concept of the camera obscura, suddenly becomes the site on which an
observer is possible. The human body, in all its contingency and specificity,
generates "the spectrum of another colour," and thus becomes the active producer of optical experience.
The ramifications of Goethe's color theory are manifold and have linle
to do with the empirical "truth" of his assenions or the "scientific" character
of his experiments. Contained within his unsystematized accumulation of
statements and findings is a key delineation of subjective vision, a post-Kantian
notion that is both a product and constituent of modernity. What is imponant
about Goethe's account of subjective vision is the inseparability of rwo models
usually presented as distinct and irreconcilable: a physiological observer who
will be described in increasing detail by the empirical sciences in the nineteenth century, and an observ(!r posited by various "romanticisms" and early
modernisms as the active, autonomous producer of his or her own visual
experience.
Clearly Kant's "Copernican revolution" (Drehung) of the spectator, proposed in the preface to the second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason
, is a definitive sign of a new organization and positioning of the subject.
For Kant, continuing the use of optical figures, it is "a change in point of view,"
such that "our representation of things, as they are given, does not conform
to these things as they are in themselves, but that these objects as appearances,

Goethe, Theory of Colours, 
trans. James Gutmann  
include nothing but the world o f the eye, which contains only form and color."
On Goethe's optics see, especially, Dennis L. Sepper, Goethe contra Newton.· Polemics and the projectfor a new science ofcolor . See also Eric G. Forbes,
"Goethe's Vision of Science," in Common Denominators in Art and Science, ed. Martin
Pollock, 
1949), 
George A Wells, "Goethe 's Qualitative Optics," journal ofthe History of Ideas 32 (197 1),


Subjective Vision and the Separation ofthe Senses


conform to our mode of representation. "5 William Blake put it more simply:
"As the eye, such the object."6 Michel Foucault emphasizes that vision in the

classical era was precisely the opposite of Kant's subject-centered epistemology, that it was then a form of immediate knowing, "a perceptible knowledge."
For example:
Natural history [in the 18th century] is nothing more than the nomination of the visible. Hence its apparent simplicity, and that air of
naivete it has from a distance, so simple does it appear and so
obviously imposed by things themselves.?
In the aftermath of Kant's work there is an irreversible clouding over of
the transparency of the subject-as-observer. Vision, rather than a privileged
form of knowing, becomes itself an object of knowledge, of observation. From
the beginning of the nineteenth century a science of vision will tend to mean
increasingly an interrogation of the physiological makeup of the human subject, rather than the mechanics oflight and optical transmission. It is a moment
when the visible escapes from the timeless order of the camera obscura and
becomes lodged in another appararus, within the unstable physiology and
temporality of the human body.
When Goethe's experiments repeatedly call for either a darkened room
or, perhaps more significantly, the closed eye, he is not simply privileging an
experience of being severed from contact with an external world. On one
hand he is indicating his conviction that color is always the product of an
admixture of light and shadow: "Colour itself is a degree of darkness; hence
Kircher is perfectly right in calling it lumen opaticum. "8 On the other hand
he is also posing conditions in which the inescapable physiological components of vision can be artificially isolated and made observable. For Goethe,
and for Schopenhauer soon after, vision is always an irreducible complex of


Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp Smith (New York,

1965), 


William Blake, "Annotations 10 Reynolds" [c. 1808], in Complete Writings, ed. Geof-

frey Keynes  

Michel Foucault, 7be Order of Things (New York, 1970), 
Goethe, Theory of Colours, 

Subjective Vision and the Separation ofthe Senses


elements belonging to the observer's body and of dara from an exterior world.
Thus the kind of separation between interior representation and exterior reality implicit in the camera obscura becomes in Goethe's work a single surface
of affect on which interior and exterior have few of their former meanings and
positions. Color, as the primary object of vision, is now atopic, cut off from any
spatial referent.
Goethe insistently cites experiences in which the subjective contents of
vision are dissociated from an objective world, in which the body itself produces phenomena that have no external correlate. Notions of correspondence and of reflection on which classical optics and theories of knowledge
were based, although rerained elsewhere by Goethe, have lost their centrality
and necessity in this text. Perhaps most imporrant is his designation of opacity
as a crucial and productive component of vision. If discourse on visuality in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries repressed and concealed whatever
threatened the transparence of an optical system, Goethe signals a reversal,
and instead poses the opacity of the observer as a necessary condition for the
appearance of phenomena Perception occurs within the realm of what
Goethe called das TrUbe-the turbid, cloudy, or gloomy. Pure light and pure
transparence are now beyond the limits of human visibility. 10
Goethe's appeal to subjective observation is pan of a shift constituting
what Foucault calls "the threshold of our modernity." When the camera
obscura was the dominant model of observation, it was "a form of representation which made knowledge in general possible." At the beginning of the
nineteenth century, however,
the site of analysis is no longer representation but man in his finitude. . . . It was found that knowledge has anatomo-physiological
conditions, that it is formed gradually within the structures of the
body, that it may have a privileged place within it, but that its forms
cannot be dissociated from its peculiar functioning; in short, that
The thematic of repression is central 
This point is made in Eliane Escoubas, "L'oeil (du) teinrurier," Critique 37, no. 418
(March 1982), 


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

there is a nature of human knowledge that determines its forms
and that at the same time can be manifest to it in its own empirical
contents."
Within Foucault's framework, Goethe's affirmation of the subjective and the
physiological in perception parallels the contemporary work of ine de
Biran. During the first decade of the century, the latter oudined a science of
the "sens intime" in an attempt to understand more accurately the nature of
inward experience. In an extraordinary body of work that challenged the
assumptions of sensationalism and British empiricism, Maine de Biran
assened the autonomy and primacy of interior experience (as Bergson and
Whitehead were to do much later), and postulated a fundamental difference
between internal and external impressions. What is crucial about Biran's work
in the early 1800s is the emergence of a resdess, active body whose anxious
motilite (i.e., willed effon against felt resistance) was a precondition of
subjectivity.
In seeking to grasp the density and the immediacy of the sens intime,
Maine de Biran blurs and often dissolves the identity of the very inwardness
that he sought to affirm. He employed the term coenesthese to describe "one's
immediate awareness of the presence of the body in perception" and "the
simultaneity of a composite of impressions inhering in different parts of the
organism."12 Visual perception, for example, is inseparable from the muscular
movements of the eye and the physical effon involved in focusing on an object
or in simply holding one's eyelids open. For Maine de Biran, the eye, like the
rest of the body, becomes a stubborn physical fact, perpetually requiring the
active exenion of force and activity. In a reversal of the classical model of the
apparatus as a neutral device of pure transmission, both the viewer's sensory
organs and their activity now are inextricably mixed with whatever object they
behold. Seven years befo re Goethe published the Farbenlebre, Maine de
Michel Foucault, 7be Order of7bings (New York, 1970), 
Maine de Biran, Considerations sur les prlncipes d'une division des faits psycholo·
giques et pbysioogiques, in Oeuvres des Maine de Biran, ed. P. Tisserand (Paris,
1949), 
omenologie du corps, essai sur 'ontologie biranienne . Also see Aldous Hux·
ley's meditations o n the work of Maine de Biran, in 7bemes a nd Variations 


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses


Biran discussed how our perception of color was determined by the body's
tendency to fatigue (by physiological modulation over time) and that the very
process of becoming tired was in fact perception.
When the eye fixes itself on a single color, for a certain length of
time, in its manner of becoming fatigued there follows a mixed
form of this color and several others, and over time the original
color will no longer be contained in this new mixture.13
For both of them, the absolute values accorded to color by Newtonian theory
are displaced by an insistence on color's transient unfolding within the human
subject.
Maine de Biran is among the first of many in the nineteenth century to
unravel the assumptions of Condillac and others about the composition of
perception. Condillac's notion of sensatio n as a simple unit, a building block
out of which clear perceptions were assembled, is no longer adequate to the
new multilayered and temporally dispersed perception that Maine de Biran
details, making impossible "a soul reduced to pure receptivity." For both
Goethe and Maine de Biran, subjective observation is not the inspection of an
inner space or a theater of representations. Instead, observation is increasingly exteriorized; the vieWing body and its objects begin to constitute a single
field on which inside and outside are confounded. Perhaps most impo rtantly,
both observer and observed are subject to the same modes of empirical study.
For Georges Canguilhem, the reorganization of human knowledge at the
beginning of the nineteenth century signals an end to the idea of a qualitatively different human order, and he cites the major discovery by Maine de
Biran that since "the soul is necessarily incarnated, there is no psychology
'9Vithout biology."14 It was the potenti<dity of this body that wo uld be increasingly subjected to fo rms of investigation, regulation, and discipline throughout the nineteenth century.
The inseparability of psychology and biology dominates the thought of
another important nineteenth-century researcher on vision. In 1815 the
Maine de Biran,njuence de 'habitude sur lafaculre de penser [1803], ed. P. Tis5erand  
Georges Canguilhem, "Qu'est-<::e que Ia psychologie," Etudes d 'bistoire et de phiosopb;e des scien=i  


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

young Arthur Schopenhauer sent Goethe a copy of his manuscript Uber das
Sehen und die Farben." The text was, in part, an homage to the older writer's
battle with Newton, but it went much further than Goethe's theory in its insistence on the wholly subjective nature of vision. Schopenhauer abandoned
Goethe's classification of colors into the physiological, the physical, and the
chemical, eliminating the latter two categories and asserting that color could
only be considered by an exclusively physiological theory. For Schopenhauer,
color was synonymous with the reactions and activity of the retina; Goethe, he
believed, had erred in his attempt to formulate an objective truth about color,
independent of the human body.
The differences between Goethe and Schopenhauer should not, however, be overemphasized. In their common preoccupation with color, and in
the emphasis they give to physiological phenomena for its explanation, they
indicate a major reversal of influential eighteenth-century views on the topic,
including Kant's devaluation of color in the Critique of judgement. 16 Both,
too, are implicated in a more general German reaction against Newtonian
optics in the early nineteenth century17 The priority previously accorded to
Lockean primary qualities over secondary qualities becomes inverted. For
Locke, secondary qualities were what generated various sensations, and he
insisted that they bore no resemblance to any real objects. But for Schopen·
hauer and for the Goethe of the 1beory ofColours, these secondary qualities
constitute our primary image of an external reality. Knowledge of a phenomenal world begins with the excited condition of the retina and develops
according to the constitution of this organ. The positing of external objects,
as well as concepts of shape, extension, and solidity come only after this
founding experience. For Locke and other of his contemporaries, primary
Arthur Schopenhauer, Sdmtliche Werke, ed. Paul Deussen (Munich, 19 11 ), val. 3.

Schopenhauer's Epistemology as Reflected in his Theory of Color," Studies in the History
and Philosophy of Science val. 18, no. 3, 1987, 
Goethe, Schopenhauer und die Farbenehre (Leipzig, 1931 ).
Foucault describes vision in the eighteenth century as "a visibility freed from all
other sensory burdens and restricted, moreover, to black and white." The Order ofTbings,

On Schopenhauer and the resistance to Newtonian optics. see Maurice Elie, "Intra·
duaion," in Anhur Schopenhauer, Textes sur Ia l'ue el sur fes coueurs, trans. M aurice Elie

 

Subjective Vision and the Separation ofthe Senses


qualities always bear a relation of correspondence, if not resemblance, to
exterior objects, and conform to classical models of the observer, such as the
camera obscura. In Schopenhauer this notion of correspondence between
subject and object disappears; he studies color only with reference to sensations belonging to the body of the observer. He makes explicit the irrelevance of distinctions between interior and exterior:
Still less can there enter into consciousness a distinction, which
generally does not take place, between object and representation
... what is immediate can only be the sensation; and this is confined to the sphere beneath our skin. This can be explained from
the fact that outside us is exclusively a spatial determination, but
space itself is ... a function of our brain. 18
Unlike Locke and Condillac, Schopenhauer rejected any model of the
observer as passive receiver of sensation, and instead posed a subject who was
both the site and producer of sensation. For Schopenhauer, following Goethe,
the fact that color manifests itself when the observer's eyes are closed is central. He repeatedly demonstrated how "what occurs within the brain," within
the subject, is wrongly apprehended as occurring outside the brain in the
world. His overturning of the camera obscura model received additional confirmation from early nineteenth-century research that precisely located the
blind spot as the exact point of entrance of the optic nerve on the retina.
Unlike the illuminating aperture of the camera obscura, the point separating
the eye and brain of Schopenhauer's observer was irrevocably dark and
opaque.'
Schopenhauer's importance here lies in the very modernity of the
observer he describes, and at the same time in the ambiguity of that observer.
Certainly Schopenhauer provides a crucial anticipatory statement of modernist aesthetics and art theory in his articulation of an autonomous artistic per·
ception. This more familiar dimension of his work outlines the grounds for
a detached observer with "visionary" capabilities, characterized by a subjectivism that no longer can be called Kantian. Yet it is crucial to affirm Scho18.
Anhur Schopenhauer, Tbe World As Will arui Representation, trans. E. F. ]. Payne
(New York, 1966), 
Schopenhauer, Tbe World As Will arui Representation, p . 491.


Subjective VISion and the Separation of the Senses

penhauer's immediate adjacency to a scientific discourse about the human
subject against which later proponents of an autonomous artistic vision supposedly rebelled. The arch anti-metaphysician Ernst Mach, in 1885, in fact
credited both Goethe and Schopenhauer with founding a modern physiology
of the senses. 20 In the following pages I want to suggest how Schopenhauer's
complex interlacing of a scientific and an aesthetic discourse about vision is
essential to an understanding of modernity and the observer, and how it challenges any simplistic opposition of nineteenth-century art and science as discrete and separate domains.
Although Schopenhauer termed his own philosophy "idealist" and conventional accounts have routinely identified him as a "subjective idealist,"
such labels misconstrue the heterogeneous texture of his thought. Never has
an idealist been so immersed in the details of corporeality or alluded to such
a large range of texts about human physiology, repeatedly situating his most
central ideas in relation to the specific anatomy of the brain, the nervous system, and the spinal cord.21 So often has Schopenhauer's aesthetics been
detached or presented independently, that its fundamental affiliation with the
supplements to The World As Will and Representation is forgotten. But his aesthetic subject, an observer freed from the demands of the will, of the body,
capable of "pure perception," and of becoming "the clear eye of the world"
is not separate from his preoccupation with the science of physiology. 22 The
more Schopenhauer involved himself in the new collective knowledge of a
fragmented body composed of separate organic systems, subject to the opacity of the sensory organs and dominated by involuntary reflex activity, the
more intensely he sought to establish a visuality that escaped the demands of
that body.
Although formed by Kant's aesthetics and epistemology in fundamental
ways, Schopenhauer undertakes what he calls his "correction" of Kant: to
Ernst Mach, Contribulions to the Analysis ofthe Sensations, trans. C. M. Williams (1;1
Salle, Ill., 1890), 
Relatively little has been written on this dimension of Schopenhauer. See, for example, Maurice Mandelbaum, ''The Physiological Orientation of Schopenhauer's Epistemology," in Schopenhauer.· His Philosophical Achievement, ed. Michael Fox 
50-67, and Joachim Gerlach, "Ober neurologische Erkennmiskritik," Schopenhauerjahrbuch, 53 , 
Schopenhauer, The World As Will and Representation, 

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses


reverse Kant's privileging of abstract thinking over perceptual knowledge,
and to insist on the physiological makeup of the subject as the site on which
the formation of representations occurs. 23 Schopenhauer's answer to the Kantian problem of Vorstellung removes us completely from the classical terms
of the camera obscura: "What is representation? A very complicated physiological occurence in an animal's brain, whose result is the consciousness of
a picture or image at that very spot."24 What Kant called the synthetic unity of
apperception, Schopenhauer unhesitatingly identifies as the cerebrum of the
human brain. Schopenhauer here is but one instance in the first half of the
nineteenth century of what has been called "the physiological reinterpretation of the Kantian critique of reason. "25 "A philosophy like the Kantian, that
ignores entirely [the physiological] point of view, is one-sided and therefore
inadequate. It leaves an immense gulf berween our philosophical and physiological knowledge, with which we can never be satisfied."26
For Theodor Adorno, Schopenhauer's distance from Kant is due in part
to his recognition that the transcendental subject is mere illusion, "a phantom," and the only unity Schopenhauer can finally accord to the subject is biological.27Implicit in Adorno's remarks, however, is that once the phenomenal
self is reduced to simply one empirical object among others, the autonomy
and authenticity of its representations are also put in question. What haunts
Schopenhauer's postulation of a noumenal realm of "entirely objective perception" is his simultaneous delineation of the observer as physiological
apparatus adequate for the consumption of a preexisting world of "pictures"
and "images." If at the core of all Schopenhauer's work is his aversion to the
instinctual life of the body, to the ceaseless and monotonous repetition of its
pulses and desires, his utopia of aesthetic perception was also a retreat from


Schopenhauer, The World A< Will and Representation, p . 273.
Schopenhauer, The World A< Will and Representation, 

original.

Herbert Schnadelbach, Philosophy in Germany 1831-1933. trans. Eric Matthews
 p. !OS. See also David E. Leary, "The Philosophical Development of Psychology in Germany 1781..1850," journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 14,
no. 2 (April1978), 
Schopenhauer, The World A< Will and Representalion, p . 273.
Theodo r Adorno , Minima Moralia, trans. E. F. Jephcon 
154.


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

the anguish of a modernized world that was making the body into an apparatus of predictable reflex activity, outlined by the scientists whose work so
fascinated him. And Nietzsche's critique of Schopenhauer's aesthetics insists
that his "pure perception" was fundamentally an escape from the sexual
body.28
In fact, Schopenhauer arrived at his definitive conflation of the subjective and the physiological during the long interval separating the first and second editions of The World a5 Will and Representation, between 1819 to 1844,
a period in Europe when the idea of both the optical apparatus and the human
body underwent profound transformation. Schopenhauer's expansion of his
text parallels the explosion of physiological research and publishing, and the
second edition records his extraordinary assimilation of large amounts of scientific material. For example, the figure of Xavier Bichat was of great importance to Schopenhauer. 29 Bichat's Recherches pbysiologiques sur Ia vie et Ia
mort  is termed "one of the most profoundly conceived works in the
whole of French literature," and, Schopenhauer adds, "his reflections and
mine mutually support each other, since his are the physiological commentary on mine, and mine are the philosophical commentary on his; and we shall
best be understood by being read together side by side."3° Although by the
Bichat's work was generally considered scientifically obsolete and part
of an increasingly discredited vitalism, he nonetheless provided Schopenhauer with a crucial physical model of the human subject. Bichat's physiological conclusions grew primarily out of his study of death, in which he
identified death as a fragmented process, consisting of the extinction of different organs and processes: the death of locomotion, of respiration, of sense
perceptions, of the brain. If death was thus a multiple, dispersed event, then
so was organic life. According to Georges Canguilhem, "The genius of Bichat
was to decentralize the notion of life, to incarnate it in the parts of organ28.
Nietzsche, Genealogy of Morals, trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York, 1968) ,
104-105.
On Bichat see Elizabeth Haigh, Xavier Bichat and the Medical Theory of the Eighteenth Century,  esp. 
Clinic, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New Yo rk, 1973), 
"Schopenhauer et Ia physiologie franc;aise: Caban is et Bichat," Revue des D eux Mondes 39
(May 1880), 
Schope nhauer, 1be World A5 Will and Representation, 

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses


isms. "31 With Bichat begins the progressive parcelization and division of the
body into separate and specific systems and functions that would occur in the
first half of the nineteenth century. One of these functions was, of course, the
sense of sight.
The subjective vision affirmed by Goethe and Schopenhauer that
endowed the observer with a new perceptual autonomy also coincided with
the making of the observer into a subject of new knowledge and new techniques of power. The terrain on which these two interrelated observers
emerged in the nineteenth century was the science of physiology. From 1820
into the 1840s physiology was very unlike the specialized science it later
became; it had then no formal institutional identity and came into being as the
accumulated work of disconnected individuals from diverse branches of
learning.32 In common was the excitement and wonderment about the body,
which now appeared like a new continent to be explored, mapped, and mastered, with new recesses and mechanisms now uncovered for the first time.
But the real importance of physiology has less to do with any empirical discoveries than that it became the arena for new types of epistemological reflection that depended on knowledge about the eye and processes of vision; it
signals how the body was becoming the site of both power and truth. Physiology at this moment of the nineteenth century is one of those sciences that
mark the rupture that Foucault poses between the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, in which man emerges as a being in whom the transcendent is
mapped onto the empiricaP3 It was the discovery that knowledge was conditioned by the physical and anatomical functioning of the body, and perhaps
most importantly, of the eyes. Yet physiology, as a science of life, equally signals the appearance of new methods of power. "When the diagram of power
abandons the model of sovereignty in favor of a disciplinary model, when it
Georges Canguilhem, "Bichat et Bernard," Etudes d'bistoire et depbilosopbie des sciences  
empiricism in 1be Family Idiot.- Gustave Flauhert 1821-1857 val. I, trans. Carol Cosman
 
intelligence ... an active method organized to reduce a whole to its pans."

On how new concepts of physiology were metaphorically transferred to the social
sciences in the nineteenth century, see Paul Rabinow, French Modern.- Norms and Fonns
of the Social Environment (Cambridge, Mass., 1989), 
Miche l Foucault, 1be Order of Things (New York, 1971 ), 


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

Drawing lly Nicolas-Henri jacob in Traite complet de l'anatomie de
l'homme lly Marcjean Bourgery_ 1839 -

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses


becomes the 'bio-power' or 'bio-politics' of populations, controlling and
administering life, it is indeed life that emerges as the new object ofpower.""
The collective achievement of European physiology in the first half of
the nineteenth century was a comprehensive survey of a previously halfknown territory, an exhaustive inventory of the body. It was a knowledge that
also would be the basis for the formation of an individual adequate to the productive requirements of economic modernity and for emerging technologies
of control and subjection. By the 1840s there had been both  the gradual
transferral of the holistic study of subjective experience or mental life to an
empirical and quantitative plane, and  the division and fragmentation of the
physical subject into increasingly specific organic and mechanical systems.
Bichat contributed to this decentralization by locating functions like memory
and intelligence in the brain and situating the emotions in various internal
organs. The work of FranzJoseph Gall (whose lectures Schopenhauer eagerly
anended as a student) and Johann Gaspar Spurzheim located the mind and
emotions exclusively in the brain. Spurzheim, for example, identified the sites
of thirty-five brain functions. This kind of mental mapping differed from earlier efforts in that the localization was done by means of objective external
induction and experiment, and no longer through subjective imrospection.35
By the early 1820s the work of Sir Charles Bell and Fran<;ois Magendie had
articulated the morphological and functional distinction between sensory and
motor nerves.36 Johannes Muller, in 1826, improved on Bell and Magendie by
determining that sensory nerves are of five types, further specializing the perceiving subject.37 Also in the mid-1820s, Pierre Flourens announced the discovery of the functions of the different parts of the human brain, in particular
the distinction between the cerebellum, the motor center, and the cerebrum,

Gilles Deleuze, Foucault, 
Seejean-Pierre Changeux, Neuronal Man.· 7be Biology ofMind, trans. Dr. Lawrence
Garey (New York, 1985), 
and Adaptation in the Nineteenth Century  
See Oswei Temkin, "The Philosophical Background ofMagendie's Physiology," Bulletin ofthe History ofMedicine 20 , 
johannes Muller, Zur Vergeichenden Physiologie des Gesichtsstnnes des Menschen
und tier Tbiere  



Subjective Vision and the Separation of the SenseS

a perception center.38 All this research built up a certain "truth" of the body
that provided a ground for Schopenhauer's discourse on the subject.39
It was, in particular, Flourens's localization of motor activity and perceptive activity, that is, a separation of sight and hearing from muscular movement, that provided Schopenhauer with a model for isolating aesthetic
perception from the systems responsible simply for the subsistence of the
body. In "common, ordinary man, that manufactured article of nature, which
she daily produces in thousands," vision was hardly differentiated from these
"lower" functions. But in artists and "men of genius," the sense of sight was
the highest ranked because of its "indifference with regard to the will," or in
other words its anatomical separation from the systems regulating mere
instinctual life. Flourens provided a physiological diagram that allowed a spatialization of this hierarchy of functions. It is not difficult to see Schopenhauer's affiliatio n with later dualist theories of perception, for example in the
work of Konrad Fiedler (free artistic and unfree nonartistic perception), Alois
Riegl (haptic and optic perception), and Theodor Lipps (positive and negative
empathy-all of which were then severed from the immediacy of the body
and were posed as dualist systems of transcendental modes of perception.""
Schopenhauer received additional confirmation from research on
reflex action, specifically from the work of the British physician Marshall Hall,
who in the early 1830s demonstrated how the spinal cord is responsible for
a number of bodily activities independently of the brain. Hall made a categorical distinction between voluntary "cerebral" activity of the nervous system

Pierre Flourens, Recherches experimentales sur les proprietes etlesfonctions du systeme neroeux dans es animaux verrebres  
It should be remembered that the struggles in the early nineteenth century berween
"localizationists" and "anti·localizationists" took on political significance. Proponems of

cerebral localizatio n "were seen as regicidal, hostile to the status quo, against the death
penalty, for lowering property qualifications for the right to vote, denying the immonality
of the soul ... anticlerical, atheist, even republican; the cerebral unitarians are legitimist."
Henri Hacaen and G. Lanteri-Laura, Evolutions des connaissances et des doctrines sur es
localisations cerebrates  
Wilhelm Worringer, for example, cites Schopenhauer in relation to the dualist aesthetics ofTheodor Lipps, in Abstraction and Empathy 11908), trans. Michael Bullock (New
York, 1948), 
Burlington Magazine (May 1963), 

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses


and involuntary "excito-motor" activity in a way that seemed to corroborate
Schopenhauer's own distinction berween mere stimulus or irritability and a
notion of sensibility (derived from Kant). 41 Yet both of these higher and lower
capacities were localities within the same biological organism. In the following passage Schopenhauer maps out, with startling explicitness, the embeddedness of aesthetic perception in the empirical edifice of the body:
Now in the ascending series of animals, the nervous and muscular
systems separate ever more distinctly from each other, till in the
vertebrates, and most completely in man, the nervous system is
divided into an organic and a cerebral nervous system. This cerebral nervous system, again, is developed to the extremely complicated apparatus of the cerebrum and cerebellum, the spinal
cord, cerebral and spinal nerves, sensory and motor nerve fascicles. Of these only the cerebrum, together with the sensory nerves
attached to it, and the posterior spinal nerve fascicles are intended
to take up the motives from the external world. All the other parts,
on the other hand, are intended only to transmit the motives to the
muscles in which the will directly manifests itself. Bearing the
above separation in mind, we see the motive separated to the same
extent more and more distinctly in consciousness from the act of
will it calls forth, as is the representation from the will. Now in this
way the objectivity of consciousness is constantly increasing, since
in it the representations exhibit themselves more and more distinctly and purely.... This is the point where the present consideration, starting from physiological foundations, is connected with
the subject of our third book, the metaphysics of the beautiful.42
Within a single paragraph, we are swept from sensory nerve fascicles to
the beautiful; or more broadly, from the sheer reflex functioning of the body
to the will-less perception of "the pure eye of genius." The concept of art may
For Hall, '"The cerebral system is volition, perception," while emotions and passions
were located in what he called "true spinal marrow, (or system)." Memoirs on the Nervous
Sys1em  
Schopenhauer, The World As Will and Representation, 


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

be absolute for Schopenhauer, but the possibility of his aesthetic perception
is nonetheless grounded in the specificity of human corporeality described
by contemporary empirical science. The possibility of "pure perception" is
thus derived from the same accumulation of physiological knowledge that
was simultaneously shaping a new productive and controllable humaq. subject. Far from being a transcendental form of knowledge, this perception is a
biological capacity, and one that is not uniform in all men or women:
The sight of beautiful objects, a beautiful view for example, is also
a phenomenon of the brain. Its purity and perfection depend not
merely on the object, but also on the quality and constitution of the
brain, that is on its form and size, the fineness of its texture, and
the stimulation of its activity through the energy of the pulse of its
brain arteries-'3
Not only is the apprehension of beauty physiologically determined, but
Schopenhauer goes on to insist that there are physical methods capable of
producing or modifying certain modes of perception.
The state required for pure objectivity of perception has in part
permanent conditions in the perfection of the brain and of the
physiological quality generally favorable to its activity; in part temporary conditions, in so far as this state is favored by everything that
increases the attention and enhances the susceptibility of the cerebral nervous system ... everything that furnishes brain aaivity
with an unforced ascendancy by a calming down of the blood
circulation 44
Schopenhauer is here proposing specific ways for "silencing the will" in order
to bring abo ut a state of "pure objeaivity" and to "lose oneself in perception."
Once it is understood that perception depends on the physical struaure and
funaioning of an empirically constituted human organism and that there are
techniques of the body or praaical procedures for externally modifying perception, the claim of Schopenhauer's observer to autonomy becomes a wishful fiaion. Schopenhauer's application of knowledge of the body to "increase

Scho penhauer, The World As Will and Representation, 
Schopenhauer, The World As Will and Representation, 

Subjective Vision and the Separatron ofthe Senses


the attention" in order to attain the "pure objectivity of perception" is a project
whose conditions ofpossibility are essentially the same as those of the emerging physiological psychology of the nineteenth century. An important pan of
this new discipline was the quantitative study of the eye in terms of attentiveness, reaction times, thresholds of stimulation, and fatigue. Such studies were
clearly related to the demand for knowledge about the adaptation of a human
subject to productive tasks in which optimum attention was indispensable for
the rationalization and making efficient of human labor. The economic need
for rapid coordination of eye and hand in performing repetitive actions
required precise knowledge of human optical and sensory capacities. In the
context of new industrial models of production, the problem of "inattention"
by workers was a serious one, with economic and disciplinary consequences.45 Moreover, it should be stressed that Schopenhauer's aesthetics and
contemporary quantitative psychological research, no matter how divergent
their respective notions of "attention," are both constituted by the same discourse of the subject, in which the physiological is fully immanent to the subjective46 It is knowledge that simultaneously provided techniques for the
external control and domination of the human subject and was the emancipating ground for notions of subjective vision within modernist an theory and
experimentation. Any effective account of modern culture must confront the
ways in which modernism, rather than being a reactio n against or transcendence of processes of scientific and economic rationalization, is inseparable
from them.
The physiological optics outlined by Goethe and Schopenhauer with their
models of subjective vision (which was brought to fulfillment by Helmholtz

4S.
See Didier Deleule and Franois Guery, I.e catpsproductif BS-86.
The problem of "attention"" became a central problem in the scientific psychology
of the later nineteenth century, panicularly in the work of Wilhelm Wundt. See Theodule
Ribot, La psychologie d'attenlion . and Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory
(18%), trans. N. M. Paul and W. S. Palmer (New York, 1988), 
""Stage by stage we shall be led to define attention as an adaptation of the body rather than
of the mind," and, like Schopenhauer, insists that "the essential effeCt or attention is to render perception more intense... On the impact of these later notions of attention, see my

"Spectacle, Attention, and Counter-memory," October SO (Fall 1989), 


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

in the 1860s) must be seen against the profound changes that took place in
theories of the narure of light. The shift from emission and corpuscular theories to undulatory or wave-motion explanations have a major significance for
nineteenth-century culture as a whole.47 The wave theory of light made obsolete the notion of a rectilinear propagation of light rays on which classical
optics and, in part, the science of perspective was based. All the modes of representation derived from Renaissance and later models of perspective no
longer had the legitimation of a science of optics. The verisimilitude associated with perspectival construction obviously persisted into the nineteenth
century, but it was severed from the scientific base that had once authorized
it and it could no longer have the same meanings it had when either Aristotelian or Newto nian optics held sway. Dominant theories of vision, whether
of Alberti, Kepler, Newton (Huygens is the obvious exception), all described
in their own fashion how a beam of isolated light rays traversed an optical system, with each ray taking the shortest possible route to reach its destination...
The camera obscura is inextricably wedded to this point-to-point epistemological setup. At the same time it must be stressed how deeply theological was
the notion that light was radiant (composed of rays) and emanative.
The work of Augustin jean Fresnel has come to stand for the paradigm
shift.49 By 1821 Fresnel had concluded that the vibrations of which light consisted were entirely transverse, which led him and subsequent researchers to
build mechanical models of an ether that transmitted transverse waves rathe r
than longitudinal rays o r waves. Fresnel's work participates in the destructio n
See jed Z. Buchwald, 7be Rise ofthe Wave Theory ofLight, Optical7beory and Experiment in the 
Force, a nd Matter, The Con ceptual Develop ment of Nin eteenth-Century Physics  
 
For important background and bibliographical data see David C. Lindberg, 7beories
of Vision .from AI-Kindi to Kepler  and Ge rard Simon, I.e regard, 'etre et
l'apparence dans l'optique de 'antiquiU! (Paris, 1988 ).
See Edward Frankel, "Corpuscular Optics and the Wave Theory of Light, The Science
and Po litics of a Revo lution in Physics," Social Studies of Science 6 , 
G. N. Cantor, Optics After Newton ( Mancheste r, 1983), esp. 
"Fresne l and the Eme rgence o f Physics as a Discipline," Historical Studies in the Physical
Sciences 4 , 

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

A j. Fresnel. Interference of light waves.

Subjective Vision and the separation of the Senses

of classical mechanics, clearing the ground for the eventual dominance of
modern physics. What had been a discrete domain of optics in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries now merged with the study of other physical phenomena, i.e., electricity and magnetism. Above all, it is a moment when light
loses its ontological privilege; and in the course of the nineteenth century,
from Faraday to Maxwell, the independent identity of light became-increasingly problematic. Goethe's color theory, with its proposal of a qualitative difference between light and color, had hinted at such developments. More
importantly here, however, as light began to be conceived as an electromagnetic phenomenon it had less and less to do with the realm of the visible and
with the description of human vision. So it is at this moment in the early nineteenth century that physical optics (the study of light and the forms of its propagation) merges with physics, and physiological optics (the study of the eye
and its sensory capacities) suddenly came to dominate the study of vision.
An important landmark in the field of physiological optics and in the formation of a new observer was the publication of johannes Muller'sHandbucb
der Pbysiologie des Menscben, beginning in 1833.so A massive summary of current physiological discourse, Muller's work presented a notion of the
observer radically alien from that of the eighteenth century. Schopenhauer
knew its contents well and it was a decisive influence on Muller's younger colleague He lmho ltz. In thousands of sprawling pages Muller unfolded an image
of the body as a multifarious factory-like enterprise, comprised of diversified
processes and activities, run by measurable amounts of energy and labor.
Ironically, this was one of the last influential texts to argue the case of vitalism,
yet it also contained the very empirical information that was to finally extinguish vitalism as an acceptable idea. In his exhaustive analysis of the body into
an array of physical and mechanical systems, Muller reduced the phenomenon of life to a set of physiochemical processes that were observable and manipulable in the laboratory. The idea of an organism becomes equivalent to an
For publication and translation history see Edwin G. Boring, A History of Experimental Psychology, 2nd ed. (New York, 1957), 
Leben des Biologen johannes MUller . Muller is called "the most outstand·
ing, versatile, and respected medical scientist of the first half of the nineteenth century" in
Clarke and Jayna, Nineteenth Century Origins ofNeuroscienti.fic Concepts, 

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses


amalgamation of adjacent apparatuses. The distinction that Bichat had tried to
maintain between the organic and the inorganic collapses under the sheer
weight of Muller's invento ry of the mechanical capacities of the body. The
work was quickly to become the basis for the dominant work in mid-nineteenth-century psychology and physiology. It was to be particularly important
for his pupil Helmholtz in the laner's description of the functioning of the
human organism as fundamentally the manifestation of a certain quantity of
power required to perform work51
The most influential pan of Muller's work was his study of the physiology
of the senses, and his treatment of the sense of sight was by far the longest in
this section of the work. ' 2 Although preceded by the work of Bell and Magendie, Muller made the most widely known statement of the subdivision and
specialization of the human sensory appararus. His fame came to rest on his
theorization of that specialization: the doctrine of specific nerve energies (spezijische Sinnesenergien) introduced in the Physiologie _It was a theory in many
ways as important in the nineteenth century as the Molyneux problem was in
the eighteenth century. It was the acknowledged foundation of Helmho ltz's
optics, which dominated the second half of the 1800s; in science, philosophy,
and psychology it was widely propounded, debated, and denounced even into
the early twentieth century'' In sha n , this was one of the most influential ways
in which an observer was figured in the nineteenth century, a way in which
a certain "truth" about sight and cognition was depicted.
The theory was based on the discovery that the nerves of the different
senses were physiologically distinct, that is, capable of one determinant kind
One sho uld note the pedagogical lineage: MOlle r was a teacher of He lmholtz who
was a teache r of Ivan Seche nov who was a teache r of Ivan Pavlo v.
MOller had already written two influential book5 on vis ion. See his Z ur vergleicbenden Physiologie des Gesichtsinnes des Menschen und 7biere  and Ober
die phantastischen Gesichterscheinungen ( Coblenz, 1826 ).
For an important critique of the theory, see Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory,
trans. N. M. Paul and W. S. Palmer (New York, 1988), 
Emile Meyerson, Identity and Reality, trans. Kate Loewenberg ( New York, 1%2), 
147-157.


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

of sensation only, and not of those proper to the other organs of sense."' It
asserted quite simply-and this is what marks its epistemological scandalthat a uniform cause (for example, electricity) generates utterly different sensations from one kind of nerve to another. Electricity applied to the optic
nerve produces the experience of light, applied to the skin the sensation of
touch. Conversely, Muller showed that a variety of different causes will produce the same sensation in a given sensory nerve. In other words, he is
describing a fundamentally arbitrary relation between stimulus and sensation.
It is an account of a body with an innate capacity, one might even say a transcendental faculty, to misperceive--of an eye that renders differences
equivalent.
His most exhaustive demonstration here is with the sense of sight, and
he arrives at the astonishing conclusion that the observer's experience of light
has no necessary connection with any actual light.'' In fact, his chapter on
vision is subtitled "Physical Conditions Necessary for the Production of luminous Images," a phrase that would have been unimaginable before the nineteenth century. He then proceeds to enumerate the agencies capable of
producing the sensation of light:

By the undulations or emanations which from their action
on the eye are called light, although they may have many other
actions than this; for instance, they effect chemical changes, and are
the means of maintaining the organic processes in plants.
By mechanical influences; as concussion or a blow.
By electricity.


His opening premises are the following:
The same internal cause excites in the different senses different sen·

sations and in each sense lhe sensations peculiar to it
The same external cause also gives rise to different sensations in each
sense according to the special endowments of the nerve.
The peculiar sensation of each nerve can be excited by several distinct causes, internal and external.

Elements ofPhysiology, p . 1061.
Sir Charles Eastlake, in the notes to his 1840 translation of Goethe's Theory of Colours, cites Muller as demonstrating "the inherent capacity of the organ ofvision to produce
light and colours" (

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses


By chemical agents, such as narcotics, digitalis, &c. which,
being absorbed into the blood, give rise to the appearance of luminous sparks, &c. before the eyes independently of any external
cause.
By the stimulus of the blood in a state of congestion. ( 1064)
Further on Muller reiterates these possibilities: "The sensations of light and
color are produced wherever aliquot parts of the retina are excited by any
internal stimulus such as the blood, or by an external stimulus such as mechanical pressure, electricity, &c." The "&c." seems added almost begrudgingly
as Muller concedes that radiant light, too, can produce "luminous images."
Again the camera obscura model is made irrelevant. The experience of
light becomes severed from any stable point of reference or from any source
or origin around which a world could be constituted and apprehended. Sight
here has been specialized and separated certainly, but it no longer resembles
any classical models. The theory of specific nerve energies presents the outlines of a visual modernity in which the "referential illusion" is unsparingly
laid bare. The very absence of referentiality is the ground on which new
instrumental techniques will construct for an observer a new "real" world. It
is a question, in the early 1830s, of a perceiver whose very empirical nature
renders identities unstable and mobile, and for whom sensations are interchangeable. In effect, vision is redefined as a capacity for being affected by
sensations that have no necessary link to a referent, thus imperiling any coherent system of meaning. Muller's theory was potentially so nihilistic that it is no
wonder Helmholtz, Hermann Lotze, and others, who accepted its empirical
premises, were impelled to invent theories of cognition and signification that
concealed its uncompromising cultural implications. Helmholtz put forward
his celebrated notio n of "unconscious inference" and Lotze his theory of
"local signs." Both wanted an epistemology based on subjective vision, but
one that guaranteed dependable knowledge without the threat of arbitrariness.56 What was at stake and seemed so threatening was not just a new form

Helmholtz attempted to establish regular but nonmimetic relations between sensations and external objectS and events. See his Handbook ofPhysiological Optics.
New York, Dover, 1962, I(-35. But later, Helmholtz's "psychologism" was to become
the target of neo-Kantians who sought to reestablish a ground for a priori knowledge.


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

of epistemological skepticism about the unreliability of the senses, but a positive reorganization of perception and its objects. The issue was not just how
does one know what is real, but that new forms of the real were being fabricated, and a new truth about the capacities of a human subject was being
aniculated in these terms.
Muller's theory eradicated distinctions between internal and external
sensation, which were implicitly preserved in the work of Goethe and Schopenhauer as notions of "inner light" or "inner vision." Now, however, interiority is drained of any meaning that it had for a classical observer, or for the
model of the camera obscura, and all sensory experience occurs on a single
immanent plane. The subject outlined in his Physiologie is homologous with
the contemporary phenomenon of photography: an essential propeny of both
is the action of physical and chemical agents o n a sensitized surface. But in his
supposedly empirical description of the human sensory a_pparatus, Muller
presents not a unitary subject but a composite structure on which a wide range
of techniques and forces could produce or simulate manifold experiences
that are all equally "reality." Thus the idea of subjective vision here has less 10
do with a post-Kantian subject who is "the organizer of the spectacle in which
he appears," than it does with a process of subjectivization in which the subject
is simultaneously the object of knowledge and the object of procedures of
control and normalization.
When Muller distinguishes the human eye from the compound eyes of
crustacea and insects, he seems to be citing our optical equipment as a kind
of Kantian faculty that organizes sensory experience in a necessary and
unchanging way. But his work, in spite of his praise of Kant, implies something
quite different. Far from being apodictic o r universal in nature, like the "spec·
tacles" of time and space, our physiological apparatus is again and again
shown to be defective, inconsistent, prey to illusion, and, in a crucial manner,
susceptible to external procedures of manipulation and stimulation that have
the essential capacity to produce experience for the subject. Ironically, the
notions of the reflex arc and reflex action, which in the seventeenth century
referred to vision and the o ptics of reflection, begin to become the centerpiece of an emerging technology of the subject, culminating in the work of
Pavlov.

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses


In his account of the relation between stimulus and sensation, Muller
suggests not an orderly and legislative functioning of the senses, but rather
their receptivity to calculated management and derangement Emil DuboisReymond, the colleague of Helmholtz, seriously pursued the possibility of
electrically cross-connecting nerves, enabling the eye to see sounds and the
ear to hear colors, well before Rimbaud's celebration of sensory dblocation.
It should be emphasized that Muller's research, and that of the psychophys-

icists who follow him in the nineteenth century, is inseparable from the technical and conceptual resources made available by contemporary work in
electricity and chemistry. Some of the empirical evidence presented by Muller
had been available since antiquity or was in the domain of common-sense
knowledge.'' What is new, however, is the extraordinary privilege given to a
complex of electrophysical techniques. What constitutes "sensatio n" is dramatically expanded and transformed, and it has little in common with how
sensation was discussed in the eighteenth century. The adjacency of Muller's
doctrine of specific nerve energies to the technology of nineteenth-century
modernity is made particularly clear by Helmholtz:
Nerves have been often and not unsuitably compared to telegraph
wires. Such a wire conducts one kind of electric current and no
other; it may be stronger, it may be weaker, it may move in either
direction; it has no other qualitative differences. Nevertheless,
according to the different kinds of apparatus with which we provide its terminations, we can send telegraphic dispatches, ring
bells, explode mines, decompose water, move magnets, magnetize
iron, develop light, and so on. So with the nerves. The condition of
excitement which can be produced in them, and is conducted by
them, is . . . everywhere the same. sa
Within a very different intellectual context, Thomas Hobbes presented some of the
same basic evidence as Muller's: "And as pressing, rubbing, or striking the eye, makes us
fancy a light; and pressing the ear, produceth a din; so do the bodies also we see, or hear,
produce the same by their strong, though unobserved action." LeviaJhan . ed.
Michael Oakeshon  
Hermann von Helmholtz, On the Sensations of Tone, trans. Alexander Ellis, 2nd
English ed. (1863; NewYork,1954), 


Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

Far from the specialization of the senses, Helmholtz is explicit about the
body's indifference to the sources of its experience and of its capacity for multiple connections with other agencies and machines. The perceiver here
becomes a neutral conduit, one kind of relay among others allowing optimum
conditions of circulation and exchangeability, whether it be of commodities,
energy, capital, images, or information.
Thus a neat homology between Muller's separation of the senses and the
division of labor in the nineteenth century is not fully supportable. Even for
Marx, the historical separation and increasing specification of the senses were,
on the contrary, conditions for a modernity in which a fullness of human productive powers would be realized59 The problem for Marx under capitalism
was not the separation of the senses but rather their estrangement by property
relations; vision, for example, had been reduced to the sheer "sense of having." In what may be seen as a kind of reformulation of Muller's theory of specific nerve energies, Marx, in 1844, foresees an emancipated social world in
which the differentiation and autonomy of the senses will be even more
heightened: "To the eye an object comes to be other than it is to the ear, and
the object of the eye is another object than the object of the ear. The specific
character of each essential power is precisely its specific essence, and therefore
also the specific mode of its objectification. "60 This is Marx sounding like a
modernist, postulating a utopia of disinterested perception, a world devoid
of exchange values in which vision can revel in its own pure operation. It was
also in the 1840s that John Ruskin began to articulate his own notion of a spe·
cialized, heightened vision, and like Marx he implies that the separation and
specialization of the senses is not the same as the fragmentation of human
labor. By the 1850s Ruskin, in a celebrated passage, is able to define the capacities of a new kind of observer:

century analogies between nerves and telegraphy, see Oolf Sternberger, Panorama ofthe
Nineteenth Century, 
See Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, trans. Manin Mil·
ligan (New York, 1968), 
history of the world down to the present." See the related discussion in Fredric Jameson,
1be Polflical Unconscious (Ithaca, 1981 ), 
Marx, EconomicandPhiosophicManuscriptsoflB44,

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses


The whole technical power of painting depends on our recovery
of what may be called the innocence of the eye; that is to say, of a
son of childish perception of these flat stains of colour, merely as
such, without consciousness of what they signify,-as a blind man
would see them if suddenly gifted with sight.61
Clearly Ruskin is affirming a kind of primal opticality that was not even a possibility amid the eighteenth-century responses to the Molyneux problem. But
it is more imponant to see that Ruskin and Muller are both modernizing vision
in the same way, that a mapping out of an "innocent" vision is common to both.
Ruskin's own staning point in describing the specific character of vision is
actually much the same as that of Helmholtz. Compare Ruskin in The Elements
of Drawing, "Everything that you can see in the world around you presents
itself to your eyes only as an arrangement of patches of different colo urs variously shaded," with Helmholtz, "Everything our eye sees it sees as an aggregate of coloured surfaces in the visual field--that is its form of visual
intuition. "62 Decades befo re related unerances by Maurice Denis, Alois Riegl,
and others, Helmholtz used this premise for constructing a normalized and
quantifiable model of human vision. Yet Ruskin was equally able to employ
it in suggesting the possibility of a purified subjective vision, of an immediate
and unfiltered access to the evidence of this privileged sense. But if the vision
of Ruskin, Cezanne, Monet, and others has anything in commo n, it wo uld be
John Ruskin, The Works of john Ruskin, val. 1S, 
of Ruskin's "innocent eye," see PhillipeJunod, Transparence et opacite.-Essaisuresfondements tbeoriques de 'art moderne  
"Uterary History and Uterary Modernity," in Blindness and Insight.- sin the Rhetoric
of Contemporary Criticism (New York, 1971), 
of a desire to wipe o ut whatever came earlier, in the hope of reaching at last a point that
could be called a true present, a point of origin that marks a new departure. This combined
interplay of deliberate forgetting with an action that is also a new origin re aches the full
power of the idea of modernity.. . . The human figures that epitomize modernity are
defined by experiences such as childhood or convalescence, a freshness of perception that
results from a slate wiped clear, from the absence of a past that has not yet had time to tar·
nish the immediacy of perceptio n (although what is thus freshly discovered prefigures the
end of this very freshness)."
John Ruskin, The Works of john Ruskin, ed. E. T. Cook and Alexander Wedderburn
(London, 1903-12), p . 27; Hermann von Helmholtz, "1be Faas in Perception," Popular Scientif ic Lectures 

%

Subjective Vision and the Separation of the Senses

misleading to call it "innocence." Rather it is a question of a vision achieved
at great cost that claimed for the eye a vantage point uncluttered by the weight
of historical codes and conventions of seeing, a position from which vision
can function without the imperative of composing its contents into a reified
"real" world6 3 It was a question of an eye that sought to avoid the repetitiveness of the formulaic and conventional, even as the effon time and·again to
see afresh and anew entailed its own pattern of repetition and conventions.
And thus the "pure perception," the sheer optical attentiveness of modernism
increasingly had to exclude or submerge that which would obstruct its functioning: language, historical memory, and sexuality.
But Muller and other researchers had already demonstrated a form of
"pure" perception, by reducing the eye to its most elemental capacities, by
testing the limits of its receptivity, and by liberating sensation fro m signification. If Ruskin, and other imponant figures in later visual modernism,
sought an "infantine" obliviousness to signification, the empirical sciences of
the 1830s and 1840s had begun to describe a comparable neutrality of the
observer that was a precondition for the external mastery and annexing of the
body's capacities, for the perfection of technologies of attention, in which
sequences of stimuli or images can produce the same effect repeatedly as if
for the first time. The achievement then of that kind of optical neutrality, the
reduction of the o bserver to a supposedly rudimentary state, was both an aim
of anistic experimentation of the second half of the nineteenth cenrury and
a condition for the formation of an observer who would be competent to consume the vast new amounts of visual imagery and information increasingly
circulated during this same period. It was the remaking of the visual field not
into a tabula rasa on which orderly representations could be arrayed, but into
a surface of inscriptio n on which a promiscuous range of effects co uld be produced. The visual culture of modernity wo uld coincide with such techniques
of the observer.
See T.J. Clark, The Painting ofModern Life, 
took the ideology of the visual-the notion ofseeing as a separate activity with its own truth,
its own panicular access to the thing·in·itself-to its limits and breaking point."

4 Techniques of the Observer

Our eye finds it more comfortable to
respond to a given stimulus by reproducing once more an image that it
has produced many times before,
instead ofregistering what is different
and new in an impression.

-Friedrich Nietzsche
The retinal afterimage is perhaps the most important optical phenomenon discussed by Goethe in his chapter on physiological colors in the Theory
of Colours. Though preceded by others in the late eighteenth century, his
treatment of the topic was by far the most thorough up to that moment.' Subjective visual phenomena such as afterimages had been recorded since
antiquity but only as events outside the domain of optics and they were relegated to the category of the "spectral" or mere appearance. But in the early
nineteenth century, particularly with Goethe, such experiences attain the
status of optical "truth." They are no longer deceptions that obscure a "true"
perception; rather they begin to constitute an irreducible component of
human vision. For Goethe and the physiologists who followed him there was

I.
Goethe identifies some of these earlier researchers, including Robert W. Darwin
, the father of Charles, and the French naruralist Buffon ( 1707-1788). See Theory of Colours, trans. Charles Eastlake (Cambridge, Mass., 1970), 
A History ofExperimental Psychology (New York, 1950), 


Techniques of the ObS£tVer

no such thing as optical illusion: whatever the healthy corporal eye experienced was in fact optical truth.
The implications of the new "objectivity" accorded to subjective phenomena are several. First, as discussed in the previous chapter, the privileging
of the afterimage allowed one to conceive of sensory perception as cut from
any necessary link with an external referent. The afterimage-the presence of
sensation in the absence of a stimulus--and its subsequent modulations
posed a theoretical and empirical demonstration of autonomous vision, of an
optical experience that was produced by and within the subject. Second, and
equally important, is the introduction of temporality as an inescapable component of observation. Most of the phenomena described by Goethe in the
7beory ofColours involve an unfolding over time: "The edge begins to be blue
... the blue gradually encroaches inward ... the image then becomes gradually fainter.'' 2 The virtual instantaneity of optical transmission (whether
intromission or extromission) was an unquestioned foundation of classical
optics and theories of perception from Aristotle to Locke. And the simultaneity
of the camera obscura image with its exterior object was never questioned.3
But as observation is increasingly tied to the body in the early nineteenth century, temporality and vision become inseparable. The shifting processes of
one's own subjectivity experienced in time became synonymous with the act
of seeing, dissolving the Cartesian ideal of an observer completely focused on
an object.
But the problem of the afterimage and the temporality of subjective
vision is lodged within larger epistemological issues in the nineteenth century. On one hand the attention given to the afterimage by Goethe and others
parallels contemporary philosophical discourses that describe perception
and cognition as essentially temporal processes dependent upon a dynamic
amalgamation of past and present. Schelling, for example, describes a vision
founded on just such a temporal overlapping:
Goethe, Theory of Colours, 
idea of a reality which endures inwardly, which is duration itself." Henri Bergson, Creative
EvoiUiion, trans. Anhur Mitchell (New York, 1944), 
On the instantaneity of perception see, for example, David C. Lindberg, Theories of
VisionfromAJ-

Techniques of the Observer


We do not live in vision; our knowledge is piecework, that is, it
must be produced piece by piece in a fragmentary way, with divisions and gradations.... In the external world everyone sees more
or less the same thing, and yet not everyone can express it. In order
to complete itself, each thing runs through certain moments--a
series ofprocessesfollowing one another, in which the later always
involves the earlier, brings each thing to maturity
Earlier, in the preface to his Phenomenology (1807, Hegel makes a sweeping
repudiation of Lockean perception and situates perception within an unfolding that is temporal and historical. While attacking the apparent certainty of
sense perception, Hegel implicitly refutes the model of the camera obscura.
"It must be pointed out that truth is not like stamped coin issued ready from
the mint, and so can be taken up and used. "5 Although referring to the Lockean
notion of ideas "imprinting" themselves on passive minds, Hegel's remark has
a precocious applicability to photography, which, like coinage, offered
another mechanically and mass-produced form of exchangeable "truth."
Hegel's dynamic, dialectical account of perception, in which appearance
negates itself to become something other, finds an echo in Goethe's discussion of afterimages:
The eye cannot for a moment remain in a particular state determined by the object it looks upon. On the contrary, it is forced to
a sort of opposition, which, in contrasting extreme with extreme,
intermediate degree with intermediate degree, at the same time
combines these opposite impressions, and thus ever tends to be
whole, whether the impressions are successive or simultaneous
and confined to one image 6

York,
p . 98
6

F. W.]. Schelling, 7beAgesofthe World[ 1815], trans. Fredrick de Wolfe Bolman (New
1942), 
G. W. F. Hegel, The Phenomenology of Mind, trans. ]. B Baillie (New York, 1967),
Goethe, 7beory of Colours, 


Techniques of the Observer

Goethe and Hegel, each in his own way, pose observation as the play and interaction of forces and relations, rather than as the orderly contiguity of discrete
stable sensations conceived by Locke or Condillac-'
Other writers of the time also delineated perception as a continuous
process, a flux of temporally dispersed contents. The physicist Andre-Marie
Ampere in his epistemological writings used the term concretion to describe
how any perception always blends with a preceding or remembered perception. The words melange andfusion occur frequently in his attack on classical
notions of "pure" isolated sensations. Perception, as he wrote to his friend
Maine de Biran, was fundamentally, "une suite de differences successives.""
The dynamics of the afterimage are also implied in the work of]ohann Friedrich Herban, who undertook one of the earliest attempts to quantify the movement of cognitive experience. Although his ostensible aim was to demonstrate
and preserve Kant's notion of the unity of the mind, Herban's formulation of
mathematical laws governing mental experience in fact make him "a spiritual
father of stimulus-response psychology. "9 If Kant gave a positive account of the
mind's capacity for synthesizing and ordering experience, Herban (Kant's
successor at Konigsberg) detailed how the subject wards off and prevents
internal incoherence and d isorganization. Consciousness, for Herban, begins
as a stream of potentially chaotic input from without. Ideas of things and
events in the world were never copies of external reality but rather the o utcome of an interactional process within the subject in which ideas (Vorstellungen) underwent operations of fusion, fading, inhibition, and blending
It should be noted, however, that Hegel, in an 1807 letter to Schelling, criticized
Goethe's color theory for being "restricted completely to the empirical." Briefe von und
an Hegel, vol. I, ed. Karl Hegel  
NietzSChe, The Revolution in Nineteenth-Century 7bought, trans. David E. Gree n (New
Yo rk, 1964), p . 13.
Andre-Marie Ampere, "lettre a Maine de Biran" (1809], in Philosophie des Deux
Amperes, ed. ). Barthelemy-Saint-Hilaire  
Benjamin B. Wolman, "The Historical Role of]ohann Friedrich Herbart," in Historical Roots of Contemporary Psychology, ed. Benjamin B. Wolman (New York, 1968), 
See also David E. leary, "The Historical Foundations of Herbart's Mathematization of Psychology,"journal ofthe History ofthe Behavioral Sciences 16 , 
Perception, Theories ofArt from Kant to Hildebrand ; and Arturo Quintavalle, "The Philosophical Context of Riegl's 'Stilfragen,"' in On the Methodology ofArchitectural History, ed. Demetri Po rphyries (London, 1981 ), 

Techniques of the Qbsen;er


(Verschmelzungen) with other previous or simultaneously occurring ideas or

"presentations." The mind does not reflect truth but rather extracts it from an
ongoing process involving the collision and merging of ideas.
Let a series a, b, c, d , be given by perception; then, from the first
movement of the perception and during its continuance, a is
exposed to an arrest from other concepts already in consciousness.
In the meantime, a, already partially sunken in consciousness,
became more and more obscured when b came to it. This b at first
unobscured, blended with the sinking a; then followed c, which
itself unobscured, fused with b, which was becoming obscured.
Similarly followed d, to become fused with a, b, and c, in different
degrees. From this arises a law for each of these concepts.... It is
very important to determine by calculation the degree of strength
which a concept must attain in order to be able to stand beside two
or more stronger ones exactly on the threshold of consciousness. 10
All the processes of blending and opposition that Goethe described phenomenally in terms of the afterimage are for Herbart statable in differential equations and theorems. He specifically discusses color perception to describe the
mental mechanisms of opposition and inhibition." Once the operations of
cognition become fundamentally measurable in terms of duratio n and intensity, it is thereby rendered both predictable and controllable. Altho ugh Herbart was philosophically opposed to empirical experimentation or any
physiological research, his convoluted attempts to mathematize perception
were important for the later quantitative sensory work of Muller, Gustav Fechner, Ernst Weber, and Wilhelm Wundt. 12 He was one of the first to recognize
the potential crisis of meaning and representation implied by an autonomous
subjectivity, and to propose a framework for its regimentation. Herbart clearly
was attempting a quantification of cognition, but it nonetheless prepared the
ground for attempts to measure the magnitude of sensations, and such mea10. Johann Friedrich Herban, A Textbook in Psychology: An Ntempt to Found the Science ofPsychology on Experience, Metaphysics and Mathematics, trans. Margaret K. Smith
(New York, 1891), 
See Herban, Psychologie als Wissenschaft,   
For Herban's influence on Muller, see the latter's Elemenls ofPhysiology. ,
1380-1385.


Techniques of the Qbserver

surements required sensory experience that was durational. The afterimage
was to become a crucial means by which observation could be quantified, by
which the intensity and duration of retinal stimulation could be measured.
Also it is important to remember that Herbart's work was not simply
abstract epistemological speculation but was directly tied to his pedagogical
theories, which were influential in Germany and elsewhere in Europe during
the mid-nineteenth century.'' Herbart believed that his attempts to quantify
psychological processes held the possibility for controlling and determining
the sequential input of ideas into young minds, and in particular had the
potential of instilling disciplinary and moral ideas. Obedience and attentiveness were central goals of Herbart's pedagogy. Just as new forms of factory
production demanded more precise knowledge of a worker's attention span,
so the management of the classroom, another disciplinary institution,
demanded similar information. 14 In both cases the subject in question was
measurable and regulated in time.
By the 1820s the quantitative study of afterimages was occurring in a
wide range of scientific research throughout Europe. Working in Germany,
the 
and under what conditions. 15 His empirical research and Herbart's mathematical methods were to come together in the next generation of psychologists and psychophysicists, when the threshold between the physiological and
the mental became one of the primary objects of scientific practice. Instead
of recording afterimages in terms of the lived time of the body as Goethe had
generally done, Purkinje was the first to study them as part of a comprehensive


For Herban's theories of education, see Harold B. Dunkel, Herbart and Herbartism,

An Educalional Ghost Story  esp. 

See Nikolas Rose, 'The Psychological Complex: Mental Measurement and Social
Administration," Ideology and Consciousness 5 (Spring 1979), 
Deleule and Fran<;ois Guery,Le C01]Js 
Purkinje wrote in Latin, which was translated by others into Czech. For relevant
English translations, see ''Visual Phenomena" [1823], trans. H. R john, in WilliamS. Sahakian, History ofPsychologyc A Source Book in Systematic Psychology (Itasca, Ill., 1968),
101-108; and "Contributions to a Physiology ofVision," tranS. Charles WheatStone.journal
of the Royal Institution 1 ( 1830), 
Vision, ed. Nicholas Wade  

Techniques of the Obseroer


"

jan Purkinje. "terimages. 1823.


Teclmiq!U!S of the Observer

quantification of the irritability of the eye. 16 He provided the first formal classification of different types of afterimages, and his drawings of them are a striking indication of the paradoxical objectivity of the phenomena of subjective
vision. Were we able to see the original drawings in color, we would have a
more vivid sense of their unprecedented overlapping of the visionary and the
empirical, of "the real" and the abstract.
Although working with relatively imprecise instruments, Purkinje timed
how long it took the eye to become fatigued, how long dilation and contraction of the pupil took, and measured the strength of eye movements. For Purkinje the physical surface of the eye itself became a field of statistical
information: he demarcated the retina in terms of how color changes hue
depending on where it strikes the eye, describing the extent of the area of visibility, quantified the distinction between direct and indirect vision, and also
gave a highly precise account of the blind spot. 17 The discourse of dioptrics,
of the transparency of refractive systems in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, has given way to a mapping of the eye as a productive territory with
varying zones of efficiency and aptitude.
Beginning in the mid-1820s, the experimental study of afterimages led
to the invention of a number of related optical devices and techniques. Initially they were for purposes of scientific observation but were quickly converted into forms of popular entertainment. Linking them all was the notion
that perception was not instantaneous, and the notion of a disjunction
between eye and object. Research on afterimages had suggested that some
form of blending or fusion occurred when sensations were perceived in quick
Goethe provides a telling account of the subjectivity of the afterimage in which the
physiology of the attentive male eye and its functioning are inseparable from memory and
desire: "I had entered an inn towards evening, and, as a well fuvoured girl, with a brilliantly
fuir complexion, black hair, and a scarlet bodice, carne imo the room, !looked attemively
at her as she stood before me at some distance in half shadow. As she presently afterwards
turned away, I saw on the white wall, which was now before me, a black face surrounded
with a bright light, while the dress of the perfectly distinct figure appeared of a beautiful
sea green." Theory of Colours, 
It should be noted that Purkinje, in 1823, was the first scientist to formulate a classification system for fingerprints, another technique of producing and regulating human
subjectS. See Vlasilav Krutz, "Purkinje,]an Evangelista," Dictionary ofScientific Biography
 (New York, 1975), 

Techniques of the Observer


Tbaumatropes. c. 1825.

succession, and thus the duration involved in seeing allowed its modification
and control.
One of the earliest was the thaumatrope (literally, "wonder-turner"),
first popularized in London by Dr. John Paris in 1825. It was a small circular
disc with a drawing on either side and strings attached so that it could be
twirled with a spin of the hand. The drawing, for example, of a bird on one
side and a cage on the other would, when spun, produce the appearance of
the bird in the cage. Another had a portrait of a bald-headed man on one side,
a hairpiece on the other. Paris described the relation between retinal afterimages and the operation of his device:
An object was seen by the eye, in consequence of its image being
delineated on the retina or optic nerve, which is situated on the


Techniques of the Qbseroer

back part of the eye; and that it has been ascertained, by experiment, that the impression which the mind thus receives, lasts for
about the eighth part of a second after the image is removed ... the
Thaumatrope depends upon the same optical principle; the
impression made on the retina by the image, which is delineated
on one side of the card, is not erased before that which is paiftted
on the opposite side is presented to the eye; and the consequence
is that you see both sides at once. 18
Similar phenomena had been observed in earlier centuries merely by spinning a coin and seeing both sides at the same time, but this was the first time
the phenomenon was given a scientific explanation and a device was produced to be sold as a popular entertainment. The simplicity of this "philosophical toy" made unequivocally clear both the fabricated and hallucinatory
nature of its image and the rupture between perception and its object.
Also in 1825, Peter Mark Roget, an English mathematician and the author
of the first thesaurus, published an account of his observations of railway train
wheels seen through the vertical bars of a fence. Roget pointed out the illusions that occurred under this circumstance--the spokes of the wheels
seemed to be either motionless or to be turning backward. "The deception
in the appearance of the spokes must arise from the circumstances of separate
parts only of each spoke being seen at the same moment ... several portions
of one and the same line, seen through the intervals of the bars, form on the
retina the images of so many different radii."19 Roget's observations suggested
to him how the location of an observer in relation to an intervening screen
could exploit the durational properties of retinal afterimages to create various
effects of motion. The physicist Michael Faraday explored similar phenomena,
particularly the experience of rapidly turning wheels that appeared to be moving slowly. In 1831, the year of his discovery of electromagnetic induction, he
produced his own device, later called the Faraday wheel, consisting of two
See john A Paris, Philosophy in Sport Made Science in Earnest; Being an Attempt to
Illustrate the First Principles ofNatural Philosophy by the Aid ofPopular Tcrys and Sports
 , 
Peter Mark Roger, "Explanation of an optical deception in the appearance of the
spokes ofawheel seen through ve rtical apertures," Philosophical Transactions ofthe Royal
Society, 115 , 

Techniques of the Observer


Use ofpbenakistiscope before a mirror

spoked or slotted wheels mounted on the same axis. By varying the relation
between the spokes of the two wheels relative to the eye of the viewer, the
apparent motio n of the further wheel could be modulated. Thus the experience oftemporaliry itself is made susceptible w a range of external technical
manipulations.
During the late 1820s the Belgian scientist joseph Plateau also conducted
a wide range of experiments with afterimages, some ofwhich cost him his eyesight due to staring directly into the sun for extended periods. By 1828 he had
worked with a Newton color wheel, demonstrating that the duration and qualiry of retinal afterimages varied with the intensiry, color, time, and direction
of the stimulus. He also made a calculation of the average time that such sensations lasted-about a third of a second. What is more, his research seemed
to confirm the earlier speculations of Goethe and others that retinal afterimages do not simply dissipate uniformly, but go through a number of positive
and negative states before vanishing. He made one of the most influential formulations of the theory of "persistence of visio n."
If several objects which differ sequentially in terms of form and
positio n are presented one after the o ther to the eye in very brief


Phenakistiscopes. 1830s.

Techniques of the Obseroer

Techniques of the Obseroer


Pbenakistiscope.

intervals and sufficiendy close together, the impressions they produce on the retina will blend together without confusion and one
will believe that a single object is gradually changing form and
position. 20
In the early 1830s Plateau constructed the phenakistiscope (literally, "deceptive view"), which incorporated his own research and that of Roget, Faraday,
and others. At its simplest it consisted of a single disc, divided into eight or
sixteen equal segments, each of which contained a small slined opening and
a figure, representing one position in a sequence of movement. The side with
figures drawn on it was faced toward a mirror while the viewer stayed immobile as the disc turned. When an opening passed in front of the eye, it allowed
one to see the figure on the disc very briefly. The same effect occurs with each
of the slits. Because of retinal persistence, a series of images results that
appear to be in continuous motion before the eye. By 1833, commercial mod20. Joseph Plateau, Dissertation sur quelques proprietes des impressions, thesis submit·
ted at Uege, May 1829. Quoted in Georges Sadoul, Histoirr! generate du cinema. :
L 'invention du cinema  


Techniques of the QbserVer

els were being old in London. By 1834 rwo similar devices appeared: the
stroboscope, invented by the German mathematician Stampfer, and the zootrope or "wheel of life" of William G. Horner. The latter was a turning cylinder
around which several spectators could view simultaneously a simulated
action, often sequences of dancers, jugglers, boxers, or acrobats.
The details and background of these devices and inventors have been
well documented elsewhere, but almost exclusively in the service of a history
of cinema." Film studies position them as the initial forms in an evolutionary
technological development leading to the emergence of a single dominant
form at the end of the century. Their fundamental characteristic is that they are
not yet cinema, thus nascent, imperfectly designed forms. Obviously there is
a connection berween cinema and these machines of the 1830s, but it is often
a dialectical relatio n of inversion and opposition, in which features of these
earlier devices were negated or concealed. At the same time there is a tendency to conflate all optical devices in the nineteenth century as equally implicated in a vague collective drive to higher and higher standards of
verisimilitude. Such an approach often ignores the conceptual and historical
singularities of each device.
The empirical truth of the notion of"persistence of vision" as an explanation fo r the illusion of motion is irrelevant here22 What is important are the
conditions and circumstances that allowed it to operate as an explanation and
the historical subjectobserver that it presupposed. The idea of persistence of

See, for example, works as diverse as the following: C. W. Ceram,Archaeology ofthe

Cinema (New York, 1965); Michael Chanan, 7beDream that Kicks.. 7be Prehistory and Early
Years ofCinema in Britain  esp. 
et ideologie," Cahiers du cinema no. 229 (May-june 1971), 
du cinbna, vol. I  
vol. I, 
cinema  
Some recent studies have discussed the "myth" of persistence of vision. They tell us,
not surprisingly, that recent neurophysiological research shows nineteenth-century explanations of fusion or blending of images to be an inadequate explanation for the perception

of illusory motion. See joseph and Barbara Anderson, "Motion Perception in Motion Pictures," and Bill Nichols and Susan J. Lederman, "Flicker and Motion in Film," both in 7be
Cinematic Apparatus, ed. Teresa de Lauretis and Stephen Heath  

Techniques of the Observer

lll

Zootrope. Mid-1830s.

vision is linked to two different sons of studies. One is the kind of self-observation conducted first by Goethe, then by Purkinje, Plateau, Fechner, and others, in which the changing conditions of the observer's own retina was (or was
then believed to be) the object of investigation. The other source was the often
accidental observation of new forms of movement, in panicular mechanized
wheels moving at high speeds. Purkinje and Roget both derived some of their
ideas from noting the appearance of train wheels in motion or regularly
spaced forms seen from a fast-moving train'' Faraday indicates that his experiments were suggested by a visit to a factory: "Being at the magnificent lead
mills of Messrs. Maltby, two cog-wheels were shown me moving with such
velocity that if the eye were ... standing in such a position that one wheel
See Nietzsche, Human, All Too Human, trans. R). Hollingdale (1878; Cambridge,
1986), 
tomed to seeing and judging panially or inaccurately, and everyone is like the traveller who
getS to know a land and its people from a railway carriage." On the cultural impact and
"perceptual shock" of railroad travel, see Wolfgang Schivelbusch, Tbe Railway jou1711!)':
Trains and Travel in the 19th Century, trans. Anselm 


Techniques of the bserver

appeared behind the other, there was immediately the distinct though shadowy resemblance of cogs moving slowly in one direction. "24 Like the study of
afterimages, new experiences of speed and machine movement disclosed an
increasing divergence between appearances and their external causes.
The phenakistiscope substantiates Walter Benjamin's claim that in the
nineteenth century "technology has subjected the human sensorium to a.complex kind of training." At the same time, it would be a mistake to accord new
industrial techniques primacy in shaping or determining a new kind of
observer. 25 While the phenakistiscope was of course a mode of popular entertainment, a leisure-time commodity purchasable by an expanding urban middle class, it also paralleled the format of the scientific devices used by Purkinje,
Plateau, and others for the empirical study of subjective vision. That is, a form
with which a new public consumed images of an illusory "reality" was isomorphic to the apparatuses used to accumulate knowledge about an observer.
In fact, the very physical position required of the observer by the phenakistiscope bespeaks a confounding of three modes: an individual body that is at
once a spectator, a subject of empirical research and observation, and an element of machine production. This is where Foucault's opposition between
spectacle and surveillance becomes untenable; his two distinct models here
collapse onto one another. The production of the observer in the nineteenth
century coincided with new procedures of discipline and regulation. In each
of the modes mentioned above, it is a question of a body aligned with and
operating an assemblage of turning and regularly moving wheeled parts. The
imperatives that generated a rational organization of time and movement in
production simultaneously pervaded diverse spheres of social activity. A need
for knowledge of the capacities of the eye and its regimentation dominated
many of them.
Another phenomenon that corrobo rates this change in the position of
the observer is the diorama, given its definitive form by Louis J. M. Daguerre
in the early 1820s. Unlike the static panorama painting that first appeared in
the 1790s, the diorama is based on the incorporation of an immobile observer

Quoted In Chanan, The Dream thai Kicks, 
Walter Benjamin, Charles Bautk!laire: A Lyric Poet in the Era of Higb Capitalism,
trans. Harty Zohn (Londo n, 1973), 

Tecbniqtu!S of the Observer


into a mechanical apparatus and a subjection to a predesigned temporal
unfolding of optical experience. 26 The circular or semicircular panorama
painting clearly broke with the localized point of view of perspective painting
or the camera obscura, allowing the spectator an ambulatory ubiquity. One
was compelled at the least to turn one's head (and eyes) to see the entire work.
The multimedia diorama removed that autonomy from the observer, often situating the audience on a circular platform that was slowly moved, permitting
views of different scenes and shifting light effects. Like the phenakistiscope or
the zootrope, the diorama was a machine of wheels in motion, one in which
the observer was a component. For Marx, one of the great technical innovations of the nineteenth century was the way in which the body was made
adaptable to "the few main fundamental forms of motion. "27 But if the modernization of the observer involved the adaptation of the eye to rationalized
forms of movement, such a change coincided with and was possible only
because of an increasing abstraction of optical experience from a stable referent. Thus one feature of modernization in the nineteenth century was the
"uprooting" of vision from the more inflexible representational system of the
camera obscura.
Consider also the kaleidoscope, invented in 1815 by Sir David Brewster.
With all the luminous possibilities suggested by Baudelaire and later Proust,
the kaleidoscope seems radically unlike the rigid and disciplinary structure
of the phenakistiscope, with its sequential repetition of regulated representations. For Baudelaire the kaleidoscope coincided with modernity itself; to
become a "kaleidoscope gifted with consciousness" was the goal of"the lover
of universal life." In his text it figured as a machine for the disintegration of
a unitary subjectivity and for the scattering of desire into new shifting and
An imponant study on the relation between the panorama and the diorama is Eric
de Kuyper and Emile Poppe, 'Voir et regarder," Communicmions 34 , 
Other works include Stephan Oettermann, Des Panorama ; Heinz Buddemeier, Panorama, Diorama, Photograpbie, Entstehung und Wirkung neuer Medien im
19.abrhundert ; Helmut and Alison Gemsheim,L.j. M. Daguerre' The History of the Diorama and the Daguerreotype (New York, 1968); Dolf Sternberger, Panorama ofthe 19th Century, trans. Joachim Neugroschel (New York, 1977), 
lves, 1967); and W. Neite, "The Cologne Diorama," History ofPhotography 3, no. 2 (April
1979), 
Karl Marx, Capital, val. I, 


Techniques of the Observer

THE DIORAMA.
7be London Diorama. 1823.

labile arrangements, by fragmenting any point of iconicity and disrupting
seas is.
But for Marx and Engels, writing in the 1840s, the kaleidoscope had a
very differe nt functio n. The multiplicity that so seduced Baudelaire was fo r
them a sham, a trick literally done with mirrors. Rather than producing something new the kaleidoscope simply repeated a single image. In their attack on
Saint-Simon in The German Ideology, a "kaleidoscopic display" is "composed
entirely of reflections of itself.'''" According to Marx and Engels, Saint-Simon
pretends to be moving his reader from one idea to another, while actually
holding to the same position thro ughout. We do n't know how much Marx or
Engels knew about the technical strucrure of the kale idoscope but they allude
to a crucial feature of it in their dissection of Saint-Simon's text. The kaleidosco pe presents its viewer with a symmetrical re petitio n, and the breakup of
Marx and Engels's page into two columns of quotations explicitly demonstrates Saint-Simo n's mane uver of "self-reflection." The structural unde rpin28.

Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, 7be German Ideology, ed. R Pascal (New York,

1%3), 

Techniques of the Obseroer

Kaleidoscopes. Mid-nineteenth century.

Position of mirrors inside kaleUJoscope.


Techniques of the Qbserver

nings of the kaleidoscope are bipolar and paradoxically the characteristic
effect of shimmering dissolution is produced by a simple binary reflective
setup (it consists of two plane mirrors extending the length of the tube,
inclined at an angle of sixty degrees, or any angle that is a sub-multiple of four
right angles). The rotation of this invariant symmetrical format is what generates the appearance of decomposition and proliferation.
·
Fo r Sir David Brewster, the justificatio n fo r making the kaleidoscope was
productivity and efficiency. He saw it as a mechanical means for the reformation of art according to an industrial paradigm. Since symmetry was the basis of
beauty in nature and visual art, he declared, the kaleidoscope was aptly suited
to produce art through "the inversion and multiplication of simple forms."
If we reflect furthe r on the nature of the designs thus composed,
and on the me thods which must be employed in their compositio n, the Kaleidoscope will assume the characte r of the highest
class of machinery, which improves at the same time that it
abridges the exertio ns of individuals. There are few machines,
indeed, which rise higher above the operations of human skill. It
will create in an hour, what a thousand artists could not invent in
the course of a year; and while it wo rks with such unexampled
rapidity, it works also with a corresponding beauty and precisio n. 29
Brewster's proposal of infinite serial production seems far re moved from
Baudelaire's image of the dandy as "a kaleidoscope gifted with consciousness." But the abstraction necessary for Brewster's industrial delirium is made
possible by the same forces of modernization that allowed Baudelaire to use
the kaleidoscope as a model for the kinetic experience of "the multiplicity of
life itself and the flickering grace of all its elements."
The most significant fo rm of visual imagery in the nineteenth century,
with the exception of photographs, was the stereoscope." It is easily forgonen

Sir David Brewster, The Kaleidoscope.- Its History, Theory, and Constn.tction (1819;
rpt. london, 1858), 
Charles Baudelaire, "Le peintre de Ia vie modeme," in Oeuvres Completes (Paris,
1961), 
phenakistiscope in his 1853 essay "Morale du jo ujo u," 
There are few serious cultural or historical studies of the stereoscope. Some helpful

Techniques of the Observer

Second Empire interior with lenses, magic lantern, and stereoscope.



Techniques of the Qbseroer

now how pervasive was the experience of the stereoscope and how for
decades it defined a major mode of experiencing photographically produced
images. This too is a form whose history has thus far been confounded with
that of another phenomenon, in this case photography. Yet as I indicated in
my introduction, its conceptual structure and the historical circumstances of
its invention are thoroughly independent of photography. Although distinct
from the optical devices that represented the illusion of movement, the stereoscope is nonetheless part of the same reorganization of the observer, the
same relations of knowledge and power, that those devices implied.
Of primary concern here is the period during which the technical and
theoretical principles of the stereoscope were developed, rather than the
issue of its effects once it was distributed throughout a sociocultural field.
Only after 1850 did its wide commercial diffusion throughout North America
and Europe occur.32 The origins of the stereoscope are intertwined with
research in the 1820s and 1830s on subjective vision and more generally
within the field of nineteenth-century physiology already discussed. The two
figures most closely associated with its invention, Charles Wheatstone and Sir
David Brewster, had already written extensively on optical illusions, color theory, afterimages and other visual phenomena. Wheatstone was in fact the
translator of Purkinje:s major 1823 dissertation on afterimages and subjective
vision, published in English in 1830. A few years later Brewster summarized
available research on optical devices and subjective vision.
The stereoscope is also inseparable from early nineteenth-century
debates about the perception of space, which were to continue unresolved
indefinitely. Was space an innate form or was it something recognized through
the learning of cues after birth? The Molyneux problem had been transposed
to a different century for very different solutions. But the question that trou·
bled the nineteenth century had never really been a central problem before.

works are: Edward W. Earle, ed., Points of View: 7be Stereograph in America: A Cultural
History ; A. T. Gill, "Early Stereoscopes," 7be Photographicjourna109
(1%9), 
Spaces: undscapeNiew," Artjourna42 (Winter 1982), 
By 1856, IWO years after i!S founding, the London Stereoscopic Company alone had
sold over half a million viewers. See Helmut and Alison Gernsheim, 7be History of Photography  

Techniques of the Qbserver


Binocular disparity, the self-evident fact that each eye sees a slightly different
image, had been a familiar phenomenon since antiquity. Only in the 1830s
does it become crucial for scientists to define the seeing body as essentially
binocular, to quantify precisely the angular differential of the optical axis of
each eye, and to specify the physiological basis for disparity. The question that
preoccupied researchers was this: given that an observer perceives with each
eye a different image, how are they experienced as single or unitary? Before
even when the question was asked it was more as a curiosity, never a
central problem. Two alternative explanations had been offered for centuries:
one proposed that we never saw anything except with one eye at a time; the
other was a projection theory articulated by Kepler, and proposed as late as
the 1750s, which asserted that each eye projects an object to its actual location.33 But in the nineteenth century the unity of the visual field could not be
so easily predicated.
By the late 1820s physiologists were seeking anatomical evidence in the
structure of the optical chiasma, the point behind the eyes where the nerve
fibers leading from the retina to the brain cross each other, carrying half of
the nerves from each retina to each side of the brain.3< But such physiological
evidence was relatively inconclusive at that time. Wheatstone's conclusions in
came out of the successful measurement of binocular parallax, or the
degree to which the angle of the axis of each eye differed when focused on
the same point. The human organism, he claimed, had the capacity under
most conditions to synthesize retinal disparity into a single unitary image.
While this seems obvious from our own standpoint, Wheatstone's work
marked a major break from older explanations (or often disregard) of the bin·
ocular body.
The form of the stereoscope is linked to some of Wheatstone's initial
findings: his research concerned the visual experience of objects relatively
close to the eye.
When an object is viewed at so great a distance that the optic axes
of both eyes are sensibly parallel when directed towards it, the per33.

See, for example, William Porterfield, A Treatise on the Eye, the Manner and Pbe·

ncmena of VIsion  
SeeR L. Gregory,EyeandBrain:TbePsychologyofSeein& 3rded. 



Techniques of the Observer

spective projections of it, seen by each eye separately, and the
appearance to the two eyes is precisely the same as when the object
is seen by one eye only. 35
Instead Wheatstone was preoccupied with objects close enough to the
observer so that the optic axes had different angles.
When the object is placed so near the eyes that to view it the optic
axes must converge ... a different perspective projection .of it is
seen by each eye, and these perspectives are more dissimilar as the
convergence of the optic axes becomes greater. 36
Thus physical proximity brings binocular vision into play as an operation of
reconciling disparity, of making two distinct views appear as one. This is what
links the stereoscope with other devices in the 1830s like the phenakistiscope.
Its "realism" presupposes perceptual experience to be essentially an apprehension of differences. The relation of the observer to the object is not one
of identity but an experience of disjunct or divergent images. Helmholtz's
influential epistemology was based on such a "differential hypothesis."37 Both
Wheatstone and Brewster indicated that the fusion of pictures viewed in astereoscope took place over time and that their convergence might not actually
be secure. According to Brewster,
the relief is not obtained from the mere combination or superposition of the two dissimilar pictures. The superposition is
effected by turning each eye upon the object, but the relief is given
by the play of the optic axes in uniting, in rapid succession, similar
points of the two pictures.
. Though the pictures apparently
coalesce, yet the relief is given by the subsequent play of the optic

Charles Whearstone, "Contributions to the physiology of vision-Part the first. On

some remarkable, and hilherto unobserved, phenomena of binocular vision," in Brewster

and Wheatstone on Vision, ed. Nicholas]. Wade  

Whearstone, "Contributions to a physiology of vision," 
Hermann von Helmholtz, "The Facts in Perception," Epistemological Writings, ed.
Moritz Schlick  
acquired by observation of the images during the movemenrs of our eyes, provided only
that there exisrs, betWeen ocherwise qualitatively alike retinal sensations, some or other
perceptible difference corresponding to the difference betWeen distinct places on the
retina."

Techniques of the QbsenJer

David Brewster's lenticu lar Slereoscope. 1849.



Techniques of the Observer

axes varying themselves successively upon, and unifying, the similar points in each picture that correspond to different distances
from the observer.""
Brewster thus confirms there never really is a stereoscopic image, that it is a
conjuration, an effect of the observer's experience of the differential between
two other images.
'
In devising the stereoscope, Wheatstone aimed to simulate the actual
presence of a physical object or scene, not to discover another way to exhibit
a print or drawing. Painting had been an adequate form of representation, he
asserts, but only for images of objects at a great distance. When a landscape
is presented to a viewer, "if those circumstances which would disturb the illusion are excluded," we could mistake the representation for reality. He
declares that up ro this point in history it is impossible for an artist ro give a
faithful representation of any near solid object.
When the painting and the object are seen with both eyes, in the
case of the painting two similar objects are projected on the retina,
in the case of the solid object the pictures are dissimilar; there is
therefore an essential difference between the impressions on the
organs of sensation in the two cases, and consequently between
the perceptions formed in the mind; the painting therefore cannot
be confounded with the solid object.39
What he seeks, then, is a complete equivalence of stereoscopic image and
object. Not only will the invention of the stereoscope overcome the deficiencies of-painting but also those of the diorama, which Wheatstone singles out.
The diorama, he believed, was roo bound up in the techniques of painting,
which depended for their illusory effects on the depiction of distant subjectS.
The stereoscope, on the contrary, provided a form in which "vividness" of
effect increased with the apparent proximity of the object to the viewe r, and
the impression of three-dimensional solidity became greater as the optic axes
of each diverged. Thus the desired effect of the stereoscope was not simply
Sir David Brewster, The Stereoscope: Its History, Theory, and Constro.ctf.on (London,
1856), 
Cruirles Wheatstone, "Contributions to the Physio logy of Vision," in Brewster a nd
Wbealslone on Vist'on, p . 66.

Techniques of the Observer

S1ereoscvpes in use. Second Empire.



Techniques of the Observer

likeness, but immediate, apparent tangibility. But it is a tangibility that has
been transformed into a purely visual experience, of a kind that Diderot could
never have imagined. The "reciprocal assistance" between sight and touch
Diderot specified in Letters on the Blind is no longer operative. Even as sophisticated a student of vision as Helmholtz could write, in the 1850s,
these stereoscopic photographs are so true to nature and so lifelike
in their portrayal of material things, that after viewing such a picture and recognizing in it some object like a house, for instance,
we get the impression, when we actually do see the object, that we
have already seen it before and are more or less familiar with it. In
cases of this kind, the actual view of the thing itself does not add
anything new or more accurate to the previous apperception we
got from the picture, so far at least as mere form relations are
concerned. 40
No other form of representation in the nineteenth century had so contlated
the real with the optical. We will never really know what the stereoscope
looked like to a nineteenth-century viewer or recover a stance from which it
could seem an equivalent for a "natural vision." There is even something
"uncanny" in Helmholtz's conviction that a picture of a house could be so real
that we feel "we have already seen it before." Since it is obviously impossible
to reproduce stereoscopic effects here on a printed page, it is necessary to
analyze closely the nature of this illusion for which such claims were made,
to look through the lenses of the device itself.
First it must be emphasized that the "reality effect" of the stereoscope
was highly variable. Some stereoscopic images produce little or no threedimensional effect: for instance, a view across an empty plaza of a building
facade, or a view of a distant landscape with few intervening elements. Also,
images that elsewhere are standard demonstrations of perspectival recession,
such as a road or a railroad track extending to a centrally located vanishing
point, produce little impression of depth. Pronounced stereoscopic effects
depend on the presence of objects or obtrusive forms in the near or middle
ground; that is, there must be enough points in the image that require sig40.

Helmholtz, Physiological Optics, 

Techniques of the Obseroer


nificam changes in the angle of convergence of the optical axes. Thus the most
intense experience of the stereoscopic image coincides with an object-filled
space, with a material plenitude that bespeaks a nineteenth-century bourgeois
horror of the void; and there are endless quantities of stereo cards showing
interiors crammed with bric-a-brac, densely filled museum sculpture galleries, and congested city views.
But in such images the depth is essentially different from anything in
painting or photography. We are given an insistent sense of "in front of" and
"in back of" that seems to organize the image as a sequence of receding
planes. And in fact the fundamental organization of the stereoscopic image is
planar41 We perceive individual elements as flat, cutout forms arrayed either
nearer or funher from us. But the experience of space between these objects
(planes) is not one of gradual and predictable recession; rather, there is avertiginous uncenainty about the distance separating forms. Compared to the
strange insubstantiality of objects and figures located in the middle ground,
the absolutely airless space surrounding them has a disturbing palpability.
There are some superficial similarities between the stereoscope and classical
stage design, which synthesizes flats and real extensive space into an illusory
scene. But theatrical space is still perspectival in that the movement of actors
on a stage generally rationalizes the relation between points.
In the stereoscopic image there is a derangement of the conventional
functioning of optical cues. Cenain planes or surfaces, even though composed
of indications of light or shade that normally designate volume, are perceived
as flat; other planes that normally would be read as two-dimensional, such as
a fence in a foreground, seem to occupy space aggressively. Thus stereoscopic
relief or depth has no unifYing logic or order. If perspective implied a homogeneous and potentially metric space, the stereoscope discloses a fundamentally disunified and aggregate field of disjunct e lements. Our eyes never
traverse the image in a full apprehension of the three-dimensionality of the
entire field, but in terms of a localized experience of separate areas. When we
look head-on at a photograph or painting our eyes remain at a single angle of
convergence, thus endowing the image surface with an optical unity. The
reading or scanning of a stereo image, however, is an accumulation of dif41.

See Krauss, "Photography's Discursive Spaces," 


Techniques of the Observer

ferences in the degree of optical convergence, thereby producing a perceptual effect of a patchwork of different intensities of reliefwithin a single image.
Our eyes follow a choppy and erratic path into its depth: it is an assemblage
oflocal zones of three-dimensionaliry, zones imbued with a hallucinatory daricy, but which when taken together never coalesce into a homogeneous field.
It is a world that simply does not communicate with that which produced
baroque scenography or the ciry views of Canaletto and Bellotto. Part of the
fascination of these images is due to this immanent disorder, to the fissures
that disrupt its coherence. The stereoscope could be said to constitute what
Gilles Deleuze calls a "Riemann space," after the German mathematician
Georg Riemann . "Each viciniry in a Riemann space is like a shred
of Euclidian space but the linkage berween one viciniry and the next is not
defined. . . . Riemann space at its most general thus presents itself as an amorphous collection ofpieces that are juxtaposed but not attached to each other.... ,
A range of nineteenth-century painting also manifests some of these features of stereoscopic imagery. Courbet's Ladies of the Village , with its
much-noted discontinuiry of groups and planes, suggests the aggregate space
of the stereoscope, as do similar elements of The Meeting (Bonjour, M Courbet) . Works by Manet, such as The Execution ofMaximillian  and
View of tbe International Exhibition , and certainly Seurat's Sunday
.tVternoon on tbe Island ofLa Grande]atte ( 1884- 86) also are built up piecemeal out of local and disjunct areas of spatial coherence, of both modeled
depth and cutout flatness. Numerous other examples could be mentioned,
perhaps going back as early as the landscapes of Wilhelm von Kobell, with
their unsettling hyperclariry and abrupt adjacency of foreground and distant
background. I am certainly not proposing a causal relation of atry sort
berween these rwo forms, and I would be dismayed if I prompted anyone to
determine if Courbet owned a stereoscope. Instead I am suggesting that both
the "realism" of the stereoscope and the "experiments" of certain painters
were equally bound up in a much broader transformation of the observer that
allowed the emergence of this new optically constructed space. The stereoscope and Cezanne have far more in common than one might assume. Paint42.

Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 

Techniques of the Observer


ing, and early modernism in particular, had no special claims in the
renovation of vision in the nineteenth century.
The stereoscope as a means of representation was inherently obscene,
in the most literal sense. It shanered the scenic relationship between viewer
and object that was intrinsic to the fundamentally theatrical setup of the camera obscura. The very functioning of the stereoscope depended, as indicated
above, on the visual priority of the object closest to the viewer and on the
absence of any mediation between eye and image."-' It was a fulfillment of what
Walter Benjamin saw as central in the visual culture of modernity: "Day by day
the need becomes greater to take possession of the object-from the closest
proximity-in an image and the reproduction of an image.""' It is no coincidence that the stereoscope became increasingly synonymous with erotic
and pornographic imagery in the course of the nineteenth century. The very
effects of tangibility that Wheatstone had sought from the beginning were
quickly turned into a mass form of ocular possession. Some have speculated
that the very close association of the stereoscope with pornography was in
pan responsible for its social demise as a mode of visual consumption.
Around the turn of the century sales of the device supposedly dwindled
because it became linked with "indecent" subject maner. Although the reasons for the collapse of the stereoscope lie elsewhere, as I will suggest shortly,
the simulation of tangible three-dimensionality hovers uneasily at the limits
of acceptable verisimilitude.<5
Ifphotography preserved an ambivalent (and superficial) relation to the
codes of monocular space and geometrical perspective, the relation of the
stereoscope to these older forms was one of annihilation, not compromise.
Charles Wheatstone's question in 1838 was: "What would be the visual effect
of simultaneously presenting to each eye, instead of the object itself, its pro43. See Florence de Meredieu, "De l'obscenite photographique," Traverses 29 (October
1983), 
Walter Benjamin, "A Small History of Photography," in One W Street, tranS.

The ambivalence with which twentieth-century audiences have received 3-D movies
and holography suggests the enduring problematic nature of such techniques. Christian
Metz discusses the idea of an optimal point on either side ofwhich the impression of reality
tends to decrease, in his Film Language (New York, 1974), 


Techniques of the Observer

Diagram of the operation of the Wheatstone stereoscope.

jection on a plane surface as it appears to that eye?" The stereoscopic spectator
sees neither the identity of a copy nor the coherence guaranteed by the frame
of a window. Rather, what appears is the technical reconstitution of an already
reproduced world fragmented into two nonidentical models, models that
precede any experience of their subsequent perception as unified or tangible.
It is a radical repositioning of the observer's relation to visual representation.
The institutionalization of this decentered observer and the stereoscope's dispersed and multiplied sign severed from a point of external reference indicate a greater break with a classical observer than that which occurs later in
the century in the realm of painting. The stereoscope signals an eradication
of "the point of view" around which, for several centuries, meanings had been
assigned reciprocally to an observer and the object of his or her vision. There
is no longer the possibility of perspective under such a technique of beholding. The relation of observer to image is no longer to an object quantified in
relation to a position in space, but rather to two dissimilar images whose position simulates the anatomical structure of the observer's body.
To fully appreciate the rupture signified by the stereoscope it is important to consider the original device, the so-called Wheatstone stereoscope. In

Techniques of the Observer


order to view images with this device, an observer placed his eyes directly in
front of two plane mirrors set ninety degrees to one another. The images to
be viewed were held in slots on either side of the observer, and thus were
spatially completely separated from each other. Unlike the Brewster stereoscope, invented in the late 1840s, or the familiar Holmes viewer, invented in
the Wheatstone model made clear the atopic nature of the perceived
stereoscopic image, the disjunction between experience and its cause. The
later models allowed the viewer to believe that he or she was looking forward
at something "out there." But the Wheatstone model left the hallucinatory and
fabricated nature of the experience undisguised. It did not support what
Roland Barthes called "the referential illusion."46 There simply was nothing
"out there." The illusion of relief or depth was thus a subjective event and the
observer coupled with the apparatus was the agent of synthesis or fusion.
Like the phenakistiscope and other nonprojective optical devices, the
stereoscope also required the corporeal adjacency and immobility of the
observer. They are part of a nineteenth-century modulation in the relation
between eye and optical apparatus. During the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries that relationship had been essentially metaphoric: the eye and the
camera obscura or the eye and the telescope or microscope were allied by a
conceptual similarity, in which the authority of an ideal eye remained unchallenged.47 Beginning in the nineteenth century, the relation between eye and
optical apparatus becomes one of metonymy: both were now contiguous
instruments on the same plane of operation, with varying capabilities and features. The limits and deficiencies of one will be complemented by the capacities of the other and vice versa. The optical apparatus undergoes a shift
comparable to that of the tool as described by Marx: "From the moment that
the tool proper is taken from man, and fitted imo a mechanism, a machine
See Roland Barthes, "The Reality Effect," in 7be Rustle of l£lnguage, trans. Richard
Howard (New York, 1986), 
On the telescope as metaphor in Galileo, Kepler, and others see Timothy]. Riess, 7be
Discourse ofModernism  
"In Metonymy, phenomena are implicitly apprehended as bearing relationships to
one another in the modality of pan-pan relationships, on the basis of which one can effect
a reduction of one of the pans to the status of an aspect or function of the other." Hayden
White, Metohistory: 7be Historicallmaginalion in Nineteenth Century Europe (Baltimore,
1973), p . 35.


Manufacture ofstereographs. Paris, late 1850s.

Techniques of the Observer

Techniques of the Observer


takes the place of a mere implement."49 In this sense, other optical instruments of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, like peep shows, Claude
glasses, and print viewing boxes had the status of tools. In the older handicraftbased work, Marx explained, a workman "makes use of a tool," that is, the tool
had a metaphoric relation to the innate powers of the human subject.so In the
factory, Marx contended, the machine makes use of man by subjecting him to
a relation of contiguity, of pan to other parts, and of exchangeability. He is
quite specific about the new metonymic status of the human subject: "As soon
as man, instead of working with an implement on the subject of his labour,
becomes merely the motive power of an implement-machine, it is a mere accident that motive power takes the disguise of human muscle; and it may equally
well take the form of wind, water, or steam."51 Georges Canguilhem makes an
important distinction between eighteenth-century utilitarianism, which
derived its idea of utility from its definitio n of man as toolmaker, and the
instrumentalism of the human sciences in the nineteenth century, which is
based on "one implicit postulate: that the nature of man is to be a tool, that his
vocation is to be set in his place and to be set to work. "5zAlthough "set to work"
may sound inappropriate in a discussion of optical devices, the apparendy
passive observer of the stereoscope and phenakistiscope, by virtue of specific
Karl Marx, Capital, trans. Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling (New York,
1%7), 
5!>. Marx, capital, 
of the telescope and microscope remained remarkably undeveloped during the seventeenth and eighteenth cenruries. Until the nineteenth cenrury, the microscope "remained
more amusing and instruaive, in the philosophical sense, than of scientific and practical
value." Science in History. .- The Scienlijic and Industrial Revolutions (Cambridge,
Mass., 1971), 
Marx, Gapila4 , 
Georges Canguilhem, "Qu'est-<:e que Ia psychologie," Etudes d'histoire et de philosopbie des sciences  
1bousand Plateaus, 
undertaken: of a physioscientific concept of Work (weight-height, force-displacement),
and of a socioeconomic concept of labor-power or abstraa labor (a homogenous abstraa
quantity applicable to all work and susceptible to multiplication and division). There was
a profound link between physics and sociology: society furnished an economic standard
of measure for work, and physics as 'mechanical currency' for it.... Impose the Work
Model upon every activity, translate every aa into possible or virrual work, discipline free
action, or else (which amounts to the same thing) relegate it to 'leisure,' which exists only
by reference to work."


Techniques of the Observer

physiological capacities, was in fact made into a producer of forms of verisimilitude. And what the observer produced, again and again, was the effortless transformation of the dreary parallel images of flat stereo cards into a
tantalizing apparition of depth. The content of the images is far less important
than the inexhaustible routine of moving from one card to the next and producing the same effect, repeatedly, mechanically. And each time, the mass-produced and monotonous cards are transubstantiated into a compulsory and
seductive vision of the "real."
A crucial feature of these optical devices of the 1830s and 1840s is the
undisguised nature of their operational structure and the form of subjection
they entail. Even though they provide access to "the real," they make no claim
that the real is anything other than a mechanical production. The optical experiences they manufacture are clearly disjunct from the images used in the
device. They refer as much to the functio nal interaction of body and machine
as they do to external objects, no matter how "vivid" the quality of the illusion.
So when the phenakistiscope and the stereoscope eventually disappeared, it
was not as part of a smooth process of invention and improvement, but rather
because these earlier forms were no longer adequate to current needs and
uses.
One reason for their obsolescence was that they were insufficiently
"phantasmagoric," a word that Adorno, Benjamin, and others have used to
describe forms of representation after 1850. Phantasmagoria was a name for
a specific type of magic-lantern performance in the 1790s and early 1800s, one
that used back projection to keep an audience unaware of the lanterns.
Adorno takes the word to indicate
the occultation of production by means of the outward appearance
of the product . . . this outer appearance can lay claim to the status
of being. lis perfection is at the same time the perfection of the illusion that the work of art is a reality sui generis that constitutes itself
in the realm of the absolute without having to renounce its claim
to image the world. 53
Theodor Adorno, In Search of Wagner; tranS. Rodney Livingstone 

Mode17rism, Mass Culture, Postmodemism  

Techniques of the Observer


But the effacement or mystification of a machine's operation was precisely
what David Brewster hoped to overcome with his kaleidoscope and stereoscope. He optimistically saw the spread of scientific ideas in the nineteenth
century undermining the possibility of phantasmagoric effects, and he overlapped the history of civilization with the development oftehnologies of illusion and apparition. 54 For Brewster, a Scottish Calvinist, the maintenance of
barbarism, tyranny, and popery had always been founded on closely guarded
knowledge of optics and acoustics, the secrets by which priestly and higher
castes ruled. But his implied program, the democratization and mass dissemination of techniques of illusion, simply collapsed that older model of powe r
onto a single human subjea, transforming each observer into simultaneo usly
the magician and the deceived.
Even in the late r Holmes stereoscope, the "concealment of the process
of produa ion" did not fully occur'' Clearly the stereoscope was dependent
on a physical engagement with the apparatus that became increasingly unacceptable, and the composite, synthetic nature of the stereoscopic image could
never be fully effaced. An apparatus openly based on a principle of disparity,
on a "binocular" body, and on an illusion patently derived from the binary
referent of the stereoscopic card ofpaired images, gave way to a form that preserved the referential illusion more fully than anything before it. Photography
defeated the stereoscope as a mode of visual consumption as well because it
recreated and perpetuated the fia ion that the "free" subject of the came ra
obscura was still viable. Photographs seemed to be a continuation of older
"naturalistic" pictorial codes, but only because their dominant conventions
were restricted to a narrow range of technical possibilities (that is, shutter
speeds and lens openings that rendered elapsed time invisible and reco rded

Tiedemann, "Dialectics at a Standstill, Approaches to the Passagen-Werk," in On Wa lter
Benjamin.· Critical Essays and Recollections, ed. Gary Smith (Cambridge , Mass., 1988), p p.
276--279. For the technical and cultural history of the o riginal phantasmagoria, see Terry
Castle, "Phantasmagoria' Spectral Technology and the Metaphorics of Modern Reverie,"
Critialll1UJuiry 15 (Autumn 1988), 
Motion Pictures, 
Sir David Brewste r, Leners on Natural Magic ( New Yo rk, 1832), 
This device is described by its inventor in O liver Wendell Ho lmes, "The Stereoscope
and the Ste reograph," N iantic Monthly 3, no . 20 (June 1859),. 738-748.


Holmes stereoscope. 1870s.

Techniques of the Observer

Techniques of the Observer

Column stereoscope. 18 70s.



Techniques of the Qbseroer

Phantasmagoric effects: Mid-nineteenth century theat:riad perfonnance.

objects in focus).S6 But photography had already abolished the inseparability
of observer and camera obscura, bound together by a single point of view, and
made the new camera an apparatus fundamentally independent of the spectator, yet which masqueraded as a transparent and incorporeal intermediary
between observer and world. The prehistory of the speCtacle and the "pure
perception" of modernism are lodged in the newly discovered territory of a
fully embodied viewer, but the eventual triumph of both depends on the
denial of the body, its pulsings and phantasms, as the ground of vision. 57
For the disruptive effect of Muybridge and Macey on nineteenth-<:entury codes of
"naturalistic" representation, see Noel Burch, "Charles Baudelaire versus Doctor Frankenstein," Afterimage 8-9 (Spring 1981), 
On the problem of modernism, vision, and the body, see the recent work of Rosalind
Krauss: "Antivision," October 36 (Spring 1986), 
Stales of Theory: History, Art, and Critical Discourse, ed. David Garoll (New York, 1990),

1988), 

5

Visionary Abstraction

the nineteenth century, still the
most obscure of all the centuries of
the modern age up to now.

-Manin Heidegger
Allergic to any relapse into magic, art
is part and parcel of the disenchantment ofthe world, to use Max Weber's
term. It is inextricably intertwined
with rationalization. What means
and productive methods art has at its
disposal are all derived from this

nexus.
- Theodor Adorno
The collapse of the camera obscura as a model for the condition of an
observer was pan of a process of modernization, even as the camera itself had
been an element of an earlier modernity, helping define a "free," private, and
individualized subject in the seventeenth century. By the early 1800s, however, the rigidity of the camera obscura, its linear optical system, its fixed positions, its identification of perception and object, were all too inflexible and
immobile for a rapidly changing set of cultural and political requirements.
Obviously anists in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries had made
countless attempts to operate outside the constraints of the camera obscura


Visionary Abstraction

and other techniques for the rationalization of vision, but always within a
highly delimited terrain of experimentation. It is only in the early nineteenth
century that the juridical model of the camera loses its preeminent authority.
Vision is no longer subordinated to an exterior image of the true or the right.
The eye is no longer what predicates a "real world."
The work of Goethe, Schopenhauer, Ruskin, and Turner and many others are all indications that by 1840 the process of perception itself had
become, in various ways, a primary object ofvision. For it was this very process
that the functioning of the camera obscura kept invisible. Nowhere else is the
breakdown of the perceptual model of the camera obscura more decisively
evident than in the late work of Turner. Seemingly out of nowhere, his painting of the late 1830s and 1840s signals the irrevocable loss of a fixed source
of light, the dissolution of a cone of light rays, and the collapse of the distance
separating an observer from the site of optical experience. Instead of the
immediate and unitary apprehension of an image, our experience of a Turner
painting is lodged amidst an inescapable temporality. Hence Lawrence Gowing's account of Turner's concern with "the indefinite transmission and dispersal of light by an infinite series of reflections from an endless variety of
surfaces and materials, each contributing its own colour that mingles with
every other, penetrating ultimately to every recess, reflected everywhere."'
The sfumato of Leonardo, which had gene rated during the previous three centuries a counter-practice to the dominance of geometrical optics, is suddenly
and overwhelmingly triumphant in Turner. But the substantiality he gives to
the void between objects and his challenge to the integrity and identity of
forms now coincides with a new physics: the science of fields and
thermodynamics. 2
The new status of the observer signaled by Turner is perhaps best discussed in terms of his celebrated relationship to the sun.3 Just as the sun
Uiwrence Gowing, Tunrer: Imagination and Reality (New York, 1966), 
1\Jrner's break with Newtonian and Euclidian models of space and form is discussed
in Karl Kroeber, "Romantic Historicism: The Temporal Sublime," in Images ofRomanticism: VeriJal and Visual Affinities, ed. Karl Kroeber and William Walling (New Haven, 1978),


1\Jrner's relatio n to the sun is d iscussed in Ro nald Paulson, ''Turner's Graffiti: The
Sun and Its Glosses," in Images ofRomanlicism, 
I.


Visionary Abstraction


described by classical mechanics was displaced by new notions of heat, time,
death, and entropy, so the sun presupposed by the camera obscura (that is, a
sun that could only be indirectly re-presented to a human eye) was transformed by the position of a new artist-observer In 'furner all of the mediations that previously had distanced and protected an observer from the
dangerous brilliance of the sun are cast off. The exemplary figures of Kepler
and Newton employed the camera obscura precisely to avoid looking directly
into the sun while seeking to gain knowledge of it or of the light it propagated.
In Descartes's La dioptrique, as discussed earlier, the form of the camera was
a defense against the madness and unreason of dazzlement.'
'furner's direct confrontation with the sun, however, dissolves the very
possibility of representation that the camera obscura was meant to ensure. His
solar preoccupations were "visionary" in that he made central in his work the
retinal processes of vision; and it was the carnal embodiment of sight that the
camera obscura denied or repressed. In one of'furner's great later paintings,
the 1843 Light and Colour (Goethe's 1beory)-Tbe Morning After the Deluge,
the collapse of the older model of representation is complete: the view of the
sun that had dominated so many of'furner's previous images now becomes
a fusion of eye and sun.6 On one hand it stands as an impossible image of a
luminescence that can only be blinding and that has never been seen, but it
also resembles an afterimage of that engulfing illumination. If the circular
structure of this painting and others of the same period mimic the shape of
the sun, they also correspond with the pupil of the eye and the retinal field

and Work (New York, 1966), 
(New Haven, 1985). 
On the cultural effeCtS ofthese new concepts, see Krzysztof Pomian, L'ordre du temps
 
See Michel Foucault, Madness and Civilization.- A History of Insanity in the Age of
Reason, trans. Richard Howard (New York, 1973), 
daylight, the darkness that rules at the very heart of what is excessive in light's radiance.
Dazzled reason opens its eyes upon the sun, and sees nothing. that is, it does not see . "
The extent to which Turner was influenced by Goethe's writings on physiological
optics is uncertain. That Turner was clearly aware of the physiological power of complementary colors is asserted in Gerald E. Finley, "Turner.- An Early Experiment with Colo ur
Theory,"journal ofthe Warburg and Courtauld Institute 30 , 
john Gage, "Turner's Annotated Books.- Goethe's 'Theory o f Colours,"' Turner Studies 4
(Winter 1982), 


Visio1Ulry Abstraction

I M. W Turner. Light and Colour ( Goethe's Theory---The Morning After the Deluge.

Visionary Abstraction


on which the temporal experience of an afterimage unfolds. Through the
afterimage the sun is made to belong to the body, and the body in fact takes
over as the source of its effects. It is perhaps in this sense that Turner's suns
may be said to be self-portraits. 7
But Turner was not alone in the nineteenth century with his visionary
relation to the sun. Three scientific figures already mentioned in this study,
Sir David Brewster,Joseph Plateau, and Gustav Fechner, all severely damaged
their eyesight by staring into the sun in the course of research on retinal afterimages Plateau, inventOI' of the phenakistiscope, went blind permanently.
Though as scientists their immediate aims obviously differed from those of
Turner, on a more important level theirs too was a shared discovery of the
"visionary" capacities of the body, and we miss the significance of this research
if we don't acknowledge its strange intensity and exhilaration. What this work
often involved was the experience of staring directly into the sun, of sunlight
searing itself onto the body, palpably disturbing it into a proliferation of incandescent color. Clearly these scientists came to a piercing realization of the corporeality of vision. Not only did their work find the body to be the site and
producer of chromatic events, but this discovery allowed them to conceive of
an abstract optical experience, that is of a vision that did not represent or refer
to objects in the world. And the work of all three, whether as technological
invention or empirical scientific study, was directed toward the mechanization and formalization of vision.
Although not involved like Brewster or Plateau in the invention of any
optical device, the career of Gustav Fechner is perhaps the most interesting
when juxtaposed with Turner's 9 Fechner confounds many of the conventional dichotomies on which much nineteenth-century intellectual history is

The suggestion that Turner's suns are self-portraits is made in Paulson, "Turner's

Graffiti: The Sun and Its Glosses," 
B.
Turner's personal contact with Brewster is discussed in]. A Fineberg, The life of
. M. W. TurnerR.A, 2nd. ed.  
Finely, ''Thrner's Colour and Optics: A New Route in 1822," journal of the Warburg and
the Courtauld Institute 36 , 
On Fechner's seminal position in the history of scientific psychology, see, for example, E. G. Boring, A History ofExperimental Psychology (New York, 1950), 
a general statement of his principles for the measurement of sensation, see Fechner, Elements ofPsychophysics, trans. Helmut E. Adler, (New York, 1966), 
Psychopbysik  vol. I, 


VISionary Abstraction

founded. Standard accounts have insisted on a kind of split personality. On
one hand he seemed a Romantic mystic immersed in the Natwpbilosopbie of
Oken and Schelling and in a Spinozist pantheism. On the other, he was the
founder of a rigorously empirical and quantitative psychology, crucial for the
later work of Wilhelm Wundt and Ernst Mach, providing them with the theoretical foundations for a comprehensive reduction of perceptual and psychic
experience to measurable units. But these two dimensions of Fechner were
always intertwined.'' His exhilarating and finally agonizing experience of the
sun in the late 1830s was no less primal than it was for 1\Jrner12 Already in
a solar preoccupation infused Fechner's literary meditations on vision:
Thus we may view our own eye as a creature of the sun on earth,
a creature dwelling in and nourished by the sun's rays, and hence
a creature structurally resembling its brothers on the sun.. .. But
the sun's creatures, the higher beings I call angels, are eyes which
have become autonomous, eyes of the highest inner development
which retain nevertheless, the structure of the ideal eye. Light is
their element as ours is air. 13
This early declaration of an emanative, autonomous vision, of a luminous and
radiant eye, is part of a wider recurrence in the nineteenth century of a Plotinian model of the observer to which Turner can also be linked.14 In 1846
On Fechner's "mystical" writings, see !he "Imroduaion" by Walter Lowrie in Religion of a Scientist, Selections from Gustav 1beodor Fechner. trans. and ed. Walter Lowrie
(New York, 1946), 
York, 1943). For Spinoza's relation to the work of Muller and Fechner, see Walter Bernard,
"Spinoza's Influence on the Rise of Scientific Psychology," j o urnal of the History of the
Behal'ioral Sciences 8 (Aprill972), 
II . See, fo r example, William R. Woodward, "Fechner's Panpsychism: A Scientific Solution to the Mind-Body Problem,"joumal of the History of the Behaviora l Sciences 8 (Oa ober 1972), 
Fechner's so-called crisis of 1840-1843, his physical and mental problems resulting
from his experiments with afterimages, is detailed by his nephew in Johannes Emil Kuntze,
Gustav 1beodor Fechner, Ein deutsches Gelehrtenlehen  
also suffered severe eye strain due to the precise scalar readings needed for his studies of
binocular vision.

Gustav Fechner, "On !he Co mparative Anatomy of Angels," trans. Marilynn Marshall,
j ournal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 5, no. 1 , 
Goethe gave Plotinus a place of promine nce in !he introdua ion to his optics: ''We
are re minded here of .. . the wo rds of an o ld mystic writer, which may be thus rendered,

Vmonary Abstraction


Turner produced a painting titled 7be Angel Standing in the Sun. A square
canvas exactly the size of Light and Colour of 1843, the formal structure here
is also insistently circular. In both of them Turner's familiar vortex modulates
into a pure spherical whirlpool of golden light: a radial conflation of eye and
sun, of self and divinity, of subject and object.
In the center of the later work is the figure of a winged angel raising a
sword. 1\Jrner's use of this symbol, however, is an indication less of his links
to a Romantic or Miltonic tradition of such imagery than of his remoteness
from the paradigm of the camera obscura. As it was for Fechner, the recourse
to the angel, an object with no referent in the world, is a sign of the inadequacy
of conventional means for representing the hallucinatory abstraction of his
intense optical experiences. The angel becomes a symbolic acknowledgment
by 1\Jrner of his own perceptual autonomy, an exalted announcement of the
ungroundedness of vision. And it is in this sense that Turner's work can be said
to be sublime: his painting is concerned with experience that transcends its
possible representations, with the insufficiency of any object to his concept. 15
But if 1\Jrner's work suggests the extent of experimentation and innovation in the articulation of new languages, effects, and forms made possible
by the relative abstraction and autonomy of physiological perception, Fechner's epochal formalization of perceptual experience comes out of a related
crisis of representation. Like Turner's art, Fechner's work is grounded in an
'If the eye were not sunny, how could we possibly perceive light? If God's own strength

lived not in us, how could we delight in Divine things?' This immediate affinity between
light and the eye will be denied by none ... It will be more intelligible to assert that a dormant light resides in the eye, and that it may be excited by the slightest cause from within
or without." Theory ofColours, p. liii. Heidegger discusses this passage from Goethe in his
Schelling's Treatise on the Essence of Human Freedom, trans. joan Stambaugh (Aihens,
Ohio, 1985), 
Alliez and Michel Feher, "Reflections of a Soul," ZOne 4 , 
My use of the term sublime refers to the work of Jean-Franois Lyotard, The Postmcdem Condition, A Report on Knowledge, trans. Brian Massumi 

and without discovery of the 'lack of reality' of reality, together with the invention of other
realities. ... I think in particular that it is in the aesthetic of the sublime that modem art
(including literarure) finds its impetus and the logic of avant-gardes its axioms.... The sentiment of the sublime . .. develops as a conflict between the faculties of a subject, the faculty
to conceive of something and the faculty to 'present' something." See also Lyotard, ''The
Sublime and the Avant-Garde," Artfon.m 22 (April1984), 


]. M . W Turner The Angel Standing in the Sun. 1846.

Visionary Abstraction

Visionary AbstractiOn


exhilaration and delirium made possible by the collapse of the dualities inherent in the camera obscura-its split between perceiver and world. Fechner
had a primal certainty of the interconnection between mind and matter: they
were simply alternate ways of construing the same reality. But what he wanted,
and spent years seeking, was a method of establishing an exact relationship
between interior sensory experience and events in the world, to situate these
two domains on the same field of operations. Whatever his intentions, the end
result was to relocate perception and the observer within the reach of empirical exactitude and technological intervention.
Sensation as a multiplicity of intangible psychic affeets, however, was not
in itself rationalizable-that is, it was not directly accessible to study, manipulation, duplication, and measurement as an empirically isolable entity. But
if sensation did not lend itself to scientific control and management, any form
of physical stimulus did. Thus Fechner set about rationalizing sensatio n
through the measurement of external stimulus. Where Herbart had failed in
his attempt at mental measurement, Fechner succeeded by quantifying sensations in terms of the stimuli that produced them. His achievement was the
establishment of what is variously called Fechner's U:iw or Weber's U:iw, in
which he proposed a mathematical equation that expressed a functional relation between sensation and stimulus. 16 With such an equation the insideoutside of the camera obscura dissolves and a new kind of annexation of the
observer is made possible. For the first time subjectivity is made quantifiably
determinable. This is Fechner's "Galilean" achievement-making measurable
something that had not been so before. 17
Fechner's research furthered the realization of the arbitrary or disjunctive relation of sensation to its external cause that Muller's work on nerve
energies had already disclosed. 18 For example, he found that the intensity of
Named for Ernst Weber, Fechner's teacher, whose work between 1838 and 1846 on
the sense of touch was the basis for Fechner's proposals. Foucault cites Weber's work in
the 1840s as coinciding with the emergence of a technology of behavior and the "supervision of normality" in a variety of fields. Discipline and Punish, 
See Harald H0ffding,HistoryofModenzPbilosopby,  (New York, 1955), 
'The only difference between Fechner and Spinoza here is that Fechner is eager to discover a mathematical functional relation between the two sides of existence."
"Even when applied in the same way, one and the same stimulus may be perceived
as stronger or weaker by one subject or organ than by another, or by the same subject or


-5

VISionary Abstraction

-4

-3

-2

-·

Negative Sensation  - S

Sensation =

+S

Fechner's Law, S = k log R

a sensation of light does not increase as quickly as the intensity of the physical
stimulus. Thus he concluded that there was a disproportional, though predictable, relation between increases in sensation and increases in stimulation.
Central to Fechner's work was the establishment of measurable units of sensation, quantifiable increments that would allow human perception to be
made calculable and productive. These were derived from thresholds of sensation, from the magnitude of the stimulus needed to generate the very least
noticeable sensation over and above the stimulus that is unnoticed by the
human sensorium. These units were the much-debated "just noticeable differences." Thus human perception became a sequence of magnitudes of varying intensity. As Fechner's experiments with afterimages also had shown him,
perception was necessarily temporal; an observer's sensations always
depended on the previous sequence of stimuli. But it is segmented temporality very different from that implied in Turner, or from the kind of experience
that Bergson and others later sought to champion over the scientific project
organ at one time as stronger or weaker than at another. Conversely, stimuli of different
magnitudes may be perceived as equally strong under cenain circumstances." Elements of
Psycbopbysics, 

VISionary Abstraction


initiated by Fechner. It is relevant that at the time Fechner was performing his
experiments in the 1840s, George Boole was overlapping the operations of
logic with those of algebra, attempting a related formalization of "the laws of
thought." But as Foucault has insisted, mathematization or quantification,
although important, is not the crucial issue in the human sciences in the nineteenth centuryi9 Rather, at stake is how the human subject, through knowledge of the body and its modes of functioning, was made compatible with new
arrangements of power: the body as worker, student, soldier, consumer,
patient, criminal. Vision may well be measurable, but what is perhaps most
significant about Fechner's equations is their homogenizing function: they are
a means of rendering a perceiver manageable, predictable, productive, and
above all consonant with other areas of rationalization.20
Fechner's formalization of perception renders the specific contents of
vision irrelevant. Vision, as well as the other senses, is now describable in
terms of abstract and exchangeable magnitudes. 1f vision previously had been
conceived as an experience of qualities (as in Goethe's optics), it is now a
question of differences in quantities, of sensory experience that is stronger or
weaker. But this new valuation of perception, this obliteration of the qualitative in sensation through its arithmetical homogenization, is a crucial part
of modernization.
Miche l Foucault, The OrderofTbings, 
"In a sense, the power of normalization imposes homogeneity; but it individualizes
by making it possible to measure gaps, to determine levels, to fix specialties, and to render
the differences useful by fitting them one to another. It is easy to understand how the power
of the norm functions within a system of formal equality, since within a homogeneity that
is lhe rule, the norm introduces, as a useful imperative and as a result of measurement, all
the shading of individual differences." Michel Foucault, Disciplini! and Punish, 
commensurability: human relations are sustained by a reductio n to fixed rules based o n
the consciousness of the possible identity of delineable persons and situatio ns. . . . The
common denominator, the foundation of social homogeneity and of the activity arising
from it, is money, namely the calculable equivalent of the different products of collective
activity. Money serves to measure all work and makes man a function of measurable products. According to the judgment of homogenous society, each man is worth what he produces; in other words he stops being an existence for itself: he is no more than a functio n,
arranged within measurable limits, of co llective production (which makes him an exis·
tence fo r something other than itself.)" Bataille, Visions of Excess: Sekcted Writings 19 2 71939, trans. Allan Stoekl  


Visionary Abstraction

At the center of Fechner's psychophysics is the law of the conservation
of energy, an insistence that organisms and inorganic nature are ruled by the
same forces. He describes the human subject: "In a way the relations are like
those of a steam engine with a complicated mechanism.... The only differences is that in our organic machine the engineer does not sit on the outside
but on the inside."21 And Fechner is certainly not alone here. All of Welmholtz's work on human vision, including binocular disparity, stemmed from
his original interest in animal heat and respiration and his overriding ambition to describe the functioning of a living being in precise physiochemical
terms. Thermodynamics stand behind both his and Fechner's delineation of
a being that works, produces, and sees through a process of muscular exertion,
combustion, and release of heat according to empirically verifiable laws.22
Even if Fechner's dominant legacy is the hegemony of behaviorism and the
myriad processes of conditioning and control, it is important to see how his
psychophysics originally sought a delirious merging of the interiority of a perceiver into a single charged and unified field, every part of it vibrating with
the same forces of repulsion and attraction, an infinite nature, like Turner's,
where life and death are simply different states of a primal energy. But modern
forms of power also arose through the dissolution of the boundaries that had
kept the subject as an interior domain qualitatively separated from the world.
Modernization demanded that this last retreat be rationalized, and as Foucault
makes clear, all the sciences in the nineteenth century beginning with the prefix psycho- are part of this strategic appropriation of subjectivity. 23
Fechner, ElemenJs of Psychophysics, 
Fechner, ElemenJs ofPsychophysics, 
system may increase without drawing on potential energy and may decrease without a corresponding increase of potential energy as long as the kinetic energy simultaneously
decreases or increases in another part of the system . . . It is impossible to be lost in external

perception and to think deeply at the satne time. In order to reflect acutely on something
we have to abstract from something else.... the facts are too closely connected with the
previous discussion for us not to see also in them an extension of the law of the conser·

vation of energy to the play of purely psychophysical forces."
Foucault, Discipline andPunish, 
"economic standpoint" is well known, but on a more general level psychoanalysis can be
seen as another operation of relocating the "interior" contents of the unconscious onto a
field where they can be formalized in linguistic terms, however imprecisely.

Visionary Abstraction


But Fechner's rationalization of sensation not only led to the development of specific technologies of behavior and attentiveness; it was also a sign
of the reshaping of an entire social field and the position of a human sensorium within it Later in the nineteenth century Georg Simmel found Fechner's formulations to be an incisive means of expressing how sensory
experience had become adjacent and even coincident with an economic and
cultural terrain dominated by exchange values. Simmel derived from Fechner
an informal kind of calculation to demonstrate how exchange values were
equivalent to quantities of physical stimulation. "Money," he wrote, "operates
as a stimulus to all kinds of possible sentiments because its unspecific character, devoid of all qualities, places it at such a great distance from any sentiment that its relations with all of them are fairly equal. "24 In Simmel's account
of modernity, the observer is conceivable only as an element in this flux and
inexorable mobility of values: "Within the historical-psychological sphere,
money by its very nature becomes the most perfect representative of a cognitive tendency of modern science as a whole--the reduction of qualitative
determinations to quantitative ones."25
The "real world" that the camera obscura had stabilized for two centuries was no longer, to paraphrase Nietzsche, the most useful or valuable
world. The modernity enveloping Turner, Fechner, and their heirs had no
need of its kind of truth and immutable identities. A more adaptable, autonomous, and productive observer was needed in both discourse and practice--to conform to new functions of the body and to a vast proliferation of
indifferent and convertible signs and images. Modernization effected a deterritorialization and a revaluation of vision.
In this book I have tried to give a sense of how radical was the reconfiguration of vision by the 1840s. If our problem is vision and modernity, we
must first examine these earlier decades, not the modernist painting of the
and 1880s. A new type of observer was formed then, and not one that
Georg Simmel, The Philosophy of Money, trans. Tom Bottomore and David Frisby
 
Simmel, The Philosophy of Money, 


ViOOnary Abstraction

we can see figured in paintings or prints. We've been trained to assume that
an observer will always leave visible tracks, that is, will be identifiable in relation to images. But here it's a question of an observer who also takes shape
in other, grayer practices and discourses, and whose immense legacy will be
all the industries of the image and the spectacle in the twentieth century. The
body that had been a neutral or invisible term in vision was now the thickness
from which knowledge of the observer was obtained. This palpable opacity
and carnal density of vision loomed so suddenly into view that its full consequences and effects could not be immediately realized. But once vision
became relocated in the subjectivity of the observer, two intertwined paths
opened up. One led out toward all the multiple affirmations of the sovereignty
and autonomy of vision derived from this newly empowered body, in modernism and elsewhere. The other path was toward the increasing standardization and regulation of the observer that issued from knowledge of
visionary body, toward forms of power that depended on the abstraction and
formalization of vision. What is important is how these paths continually intersect and often overlap on the same social terrain, amid the countless localities
in which the diversity of concrete acts of vision occur.

Bibliography

Before 1900
Ampere, Andre-Marie. Pbilosopbie des deux Amperes. Ed.J. Barthelemy-Saint-Hilaire. Paris.Didier, 1866.
Baudelaire, Charles. Oeuvres Completes. Paris: Gallimard, I% I.
Bergson, Henri. Matter and Memory. [18%] Trans. W. S. Palmer and N. M. Paul. New York
Zone Books, 1988.
Berkeley, George. The Works ofGeorge Berkeley, Bishop of Clayne. Ed. A A Luce and T. E.
Jessop. London: Thomas Nelson, 1948.
Bichat, Xavier. Recherchespbysioogiques sur Ia vie et Ia mL»'t. [ 1800]3d. ed. Paris: Brosson,
Gabon, 1805.
Blake, William. Complete Writings. Ed. Geoffrey Keynes. London: Oxford Univ. Press, 1%6.
Brewster, Sir David. BrewsterandWbearstone on Vision. Ed. Nicholas. Wade. London: Academic, 1983.
Brewster, Sir David. The Kaleidoscope.- Its History, Theory and Construction. London: John
Murray, 1858.
Brewster, Sir David. Letters on Natural Magic. New York: J. J. Harper, 1832.
Brewster, Sir David. The Stereoscope.- Its History, Theory and Construction with Its Application to the Fine and Useful Arts and to Education. London: John Murray, 1856.
Condillac, Etienne. Oeuvrespbilosopbiques de Condilac. Ed. Georges LeRoy. Paris.- Presses
Universitalres de France, 1947-1951.
Descartes, Rent. Oeuvres pbilosopb;ques. Ed. Ferdinand Alquit. 3 vols. Paris.- Garnier,
1963-73.
Descartes, Rent. The Philosophical Writings ofDescartes. 2 vols. Trans. John Cottingham,
Roben Stoothoff, & Dugald Murdoch. Cambridge.- Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985.
Diderot, Denis. Oeuvres esthetiques. Ed. Paul Vemiere. Paris: Garnier, 1968.
Diderot, Denis. Oeuvres pbilosopb;ques. Ed. Paul Vemiere. Paris: Garnier, 1964.
Encyclopedie ou Dictionnaire raisonne des sciences, des arts et des metiers. Paris,
1750--70.
Engels, Friedrich, and Karl Marx The Gennan Ideology. Ed. R Pascal. New York: International, 1947.
Fechner, Guslav Theodor. Elemente der Psychopbysik. 2 vols. Leipzig: Breitkopf & Hartel,


Bibliography

Fechner, Gustav Theodor. Elements ofPsychophysics. Trans. Helmut E. Adler. Ed. Davis H.
Howes. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1966.
Fechner, Gustav Theodor. Life After Death. Trans. Mary C. Wadsworth and Eugene jolas.
New York: Pantheon, 1943.
Fechner, Gustav Theodor. Religion of a Scientist.· Selections From Gustav Tb. Fechner.
Trans. and ed. Walter Lowrie. New York: Pantheon, 1946.
Flourens, Pierre. Recherches experimentales sur es proprietes et es fonctions du systeme
nervewc dans les animaux vertet>res. Paris: Crouvost, 1824.
·
Freud, Sigmund. The lnterpretalion of Dreams. [1899) Trans. james Strachey. New York:
Basic Books, 1955.
Goethe,Johann Wolfgang von. Gedenkausgabe der Werke, Briefe, und Gesprache. Ed. Ernst
Beutler. Zurich, 1949.
Goethe, johann Wolfgang von. Theory of Colours. Trans. Charles Eastlake [1840). Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 1970.
Hall, Marshall. Memoirs on the Neroous System. London: Sherwood, Gilbert and Piper. 1837.
Harris, John. Lexicon Tecbnicum: or a Universal English Dictionary ofArts and Sciences.
London: D. Brown, 1704.
Harris, joseph. A Treatise of Optics: Containing Elements qfthe Science. London: B. White,
Hegel, G. W. F. The Phenomenology ofMind. Trans.). B. Baillie. New York: Harper and Row,
Helmholtz, Hermann von. Handbook ofPhysiological Optics. 3 vols. Trans. George T. udd.
New York: Dover, 1962.
Helmholtz, Hermann von. On the Sensation of Tone. Trans. Alexander Ellis. New York:
Dover, 1954.
Helmholtz, Hermann von. Popular Scientific Lectures. Ed. Morris Kline. New York: Dover,
Herbart,Johann Friedrich. Psycbologw as Wissenscbaft. 2 vols. Konigsberg: August Unzer,
Herbart,johann Friedrich. A Textbook in Psychology: An Attempt to Found the Science of
Psychology on Experience, Metaphysics and Mathematics. Trans. Margaret K. Smith.
New York: Appleton, 1891.
Hobbes, Thomas. Leviathan. Ed. Michael Oakeshon. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1957.
Holmes, Oliver Wendell. ''The Stereoscope and the Stereograph." Atlantic Monthly 3,
no. 20 (June 1859), 
Hume, David. An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. Charles Hendel. lndi·
anapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1955.
Hutton, Charles. A Mathematical and Philosophical Dictionary. 2 vols. London: ). Davis,
Janet, Paul. "Schopenhauer et Ia physiologie franc;aise: Caban is et Bichat," Revue des deux
mondes 39 , 
Jombert, Charles-Antoine. Methode pour apprendre e tlessein. Paris, 1755.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique ofjudgement. Trans.). H. Bernard. New York: Hafner, 1951.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique ofPure Reason. Trans. Norman Kemp Smith. New York: St. Mar·
tin's, 1965.
Kircher, Alhanasius. Ars magna lucis et umbrae. Rome, 1646.

Bibliography


Kuntze, Johannes Emil. Gustav Fechner.- Ein deutsches Gelebrtenleben. Leipzig.- Breitkopf
& Hanel, 1892.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von. Monadology and Other Philosophical Essays. Trans. Paul
Schrecker and Anne Manin Schrecker. Indianapolis.- Bobbs-Merrill, 1965.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von. New Essays on Human Understanding Trans. Peter Remnant and Jonathan Bennen. Cambridge.- Cambridge Univ. Press, 1981.
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. Alexander Campbell
Fraser. 2 vols. 1894. Rpl. New York Dover, 1959.
Mach, Ernst. Contributions to the Analysis of SensaJions. (1885] Trans. C. M. Williams. La
Salle, Ill..- Open Coun, 1890.
Maine de Biran. "Considerations sur les principes d'une division des faits psychologiques

et physiologiques." In Oeuvres de Maine de Biran, ed. P. Tisserand. Paris.Presses Universitaires de France, 1949.

Maine de Biran. Influence de 'habitude sur Ia faculte de penser. Ed. P. Tisserand. Paris.Presses Universitaires de France, 1953.
Marx, Karl. Capital. 3 vols. Trans. Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling. New York.- International, 1967.
Marx, Karl. Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844. Trans. Manin Milligan. New
York.- International, 1968.
Marx, Karl. Grundrisse. Trans. Manin Nicolaus. New York Random House, 1973.
Molyneux, William. Dioptrica nova. A treatise ofdioptricks, in two parts. London.- B. Tooke,
Muller, Johannes. Elements of Physiology. 2 vols. Trans. William Baly. London.- Taylor and
Walton, 1848.
Muller, johannes. Handbuch des Physiologie des Menscben. Coblenz.-]. Holscher, 1838.
Muller, Johannes. Zur vergleichenden Physiologie des Gesichtssinnes. Leipzig.- C. Cnobloch,
Newton, Sir Isaac. opticks, or a Treatise ofthe Reflections, Refractions, Inflections and Colours ofLight. 4th e d. London, 1730. Rpt. New York Dover, 1952.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Genealogy of Morals. Trans. Walter Kaufmann, New York Random
House, 1968.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Human, All Too Human. Trans. R]. Hollingdale. Cambridge.- Cambridge Univ. Press, 1986.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Will To Power. Trans. Walter Kaufmann and RJ. Hollingdale. New
York Random House, 1968.
Paris, John A Philosophy in Sport Made Science in Earnest, Being an Attempt to Illustrate
the first principles ofNatural Philosophy by the Aid of the Popular Ts and Sports.
. London.- Thornburn, 1827.
Porta, Giambattista della. Natural Magick. London.- Young and Speed, 1658. Originally published as Magiae naturais. Naples, I 558.
Ponerfield, William. A Treatise on the Eye, the Manner and Phenomena of Vision. Edinburgh.- Hamilton and Balfour, 1759.
Purkinje, jan. "Visual Phenomena." Trans. H. R John. In History of Psychology.- A Source
Book in Systematic Psychology, ed. William Sahakian ItaSca, Ill..- F. E. Peacock, 1968.
Reid, Thomas. Essays on the Powers ofthe Human Mind. 3 vols. Edinburgh.- Bell & Bradfute,
.


Bibliography

Ribot, Theodule.la psychologie d'attention. Paris: F. Alcan, 1889.
Roger, Peter Mark. "Explanations of an optical deception in the appearance of the spokes
of a wheel ..." PhilosophicaTransactionsoftheRayal Society 115 , 
Ruskin, John. 7be Works ofjohn Ruskin. Ed. E. T. Cook. London: George Allen, 1903-1912.
Schelling, F. W. J. 7be Ages of the World. Trans. Fredrick de Wolfe Bolman. New York:
Columbia Univ. Press, 1942.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. Parerga and Paral;pomena. Trans. E. F. J. Payne. 2 vols. Oxford:
Clarendon, 1974.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. 5amtlicbe Werke. 16 vols. Ed. Paul Deussen. Munich: Piper,
1911-42.
Schopenhauer, Arthur. Textes sur Ia vue et sur les couleurs. Trans. Maurice Elie. Paris:
J. Vrin, 1986.
Schop<!nhauer, Arthur. 7be World as Will and Representation. 2 vols. Trans. E. F. J. Payne.
New York: Dover, 1958.
7be Spectator. Ed. Donald F. Bond. 5 vols. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1965.
Wheatstone, Charles. Brewster and Wheatstone on Vision. Ed. Nicholas J. Wade. London:
Academic, 1983.

J'ter 1900
Abrams, M. H. 7be Mir.ror and the lamp: Romantic 7beory and the Critical Tradition. London: Oxford Univ. Press, 1953.
Adorno, Theodor. Aesthetic 7beory. Trans. C. Leenhardt. London: RKP, 1984.
Adorno, Theodor. n Search ofWagner Trans. Rodney Livingstone. London: Verso, 1981.
Adorno, Theodor. Minima Moralia. Trans. EdmundJephcott. London: Verso, 1974.
Alliez, Eric, and Miche l Feher. "Reflections of a Soul." Zone 4, 
Alpers, Svetlana. 7be An of Describing: Dutch An in the Seventeenth Century. Chicago: Univ.
of Chicago Press, 1983.
Alpers, Svetlana. Rembrandt's Entetprise: 7be Studio and the Market. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1988.
Anderson, Barbara and joseph. "Motion Perception in Morion Pictures." In The CinemaJic

Apparatus, ed. Teresa de Lauretis. London: Macmillan, 1980, 
Aumonr,Jacques. "Le point de vue." Communications 38 . 
Barker, Francis. 7be Tremulous Private Body: Essays on Subjection. New York Methuen,
Barnes, John. Precursors of the Cinema: Peepshows, Panoramas and Dioramas. St. Ives,
Cornwall: Barnes Museum of Cinematography, 1967.
Barnouw, Erik. 7be Magician and the Cinema. Oxford: Oxfo rd Univ. Press, 1981.
Barthes, Roland. Camera Lucida. Trans. Richard Howard. New York: Hill and Wang, 1981.
Barthes, Roland. image-Music-Text. Trans. Stephen Heath. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977.
Barthes, Roland. 7be Rustle oflanguage. Trans. Richard Howard. New York: Hill and Wang,
Bataille, Georges. Visions ofExcess.· Selected Writings 1927-1939. Trans. Alan Sroekl. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota, 1985.
Baudrillard,Jean. la societe de consommation. Paris: Gallimard, 1970.

Bibliography

ISS

Baudrillard, Jean. Pour une critique de l'economie politique du signe. Paris: Gallimard,
Baudrillard,Jean. Simulations. New York: Semiotexte, 1983.
Baudry, Jean. "Ideological Effects of the Basic Cinematographic Apparatus." In Apparatus,
ed. Theresa Hak Kyung Cha. New York: Tanam, 1980.
Benjamin, Walter. Charks Baudelaire: A Lyric Poet in the Era ofHigh capitalism. Trans.
Harry Zohn. London: NLB, 1973.
Benjamin, Walter. Illuminations. Trans. Harry Zohn. New York: Schocken, 1969.
Benjamin, Walter. One W'9' Street. Trans. Edmund )ephcott and Kingsley Shorter. London:
NLB, 1979.
Benjamin, Walter. Das Passagen-Werk, 2 vols. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1982.
Benjamin, Walter. Reflections. Trans. Edmund )ephcott. New York: Harcourt Brace jovanovich, 1979.
Bergson, Henri. Creative Evolution. [1907) Trans. Arthur Mitchell. New York, Random
House, 1944.
Bernal,). D. Science in History.  1be Scientific and Industrial Revolutions. 1954. Rpt.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1971.
Bernard, Walter. "Spinoza's Influence on the Rise of Scientific Psychology."journal ofthe
History of the Behavioral Sciences 8 (Aprill972), 
Blumenberg, Hans. Legitimacy of the Modem Age. Trans. Robert M. Wallace. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1983.
Boring, Edwin G. A History of Experimental Psychology. New York: Appleton-CenturyCrofts, 1950.
Bryson, Norman. Word and Image: French Painting of the Ancien Regime. Cambridge:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1981.
Buchwald, jed Z. 1be Rise of the Wave 1beory of Light: optical1beory and EJ,perlment in
the Early Nineteenth Century. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1989.
Buck-Morss, Susan. 'The Flaneur, The Sandwichman, and the Whore: The Politics of Loitering." New German Critique 39 (Fall1986), 
Buddemier, Heinz. Panorama, Diorama, Pbotographie: Entstebung und Wirkung neuer
Medien im 19. ]abrbundert. Munich: H. Fink, 1970.
Burch, Noel. "Charles Baudelaire versus Doctor Frankenstein." Afterimage B-9 (Spring
), 
Canguilhem, Georges. Etudes d'bistoire et de philosophie des sciences. Paris:). Vrin, 1983.
Canguilhem, Georges. 1be Normal and the Pathological. Trans. Carolyn R Fawcett. New
York: Zone Books, 1989.
Cantor, G. N. optics After Newton. Manchester: Manchester Univ. Press, 1983.
Cassirer, Ernst. 1be Individual and the Cosmos in Renaissance Philasopby. Trans. Mario
Domandi. Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania Press, 1972.
Cassirer, Ernst. 1be Philosophy of the Enlightenment. [ 1932) Trans. Fritz C. A Koelln and
)ames P. Petlegrove. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1951.
Cassirer, Ernst. Rousseau, Kant, and Goethe. Trans. james Gutman, john Herman Randall,
Jr., and Paul Oskar Kristeller. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1945.
Castle, Terry. "Phantasmagoria: Spectral Technology and the Meraphorics of Modern Reverie." Critical Inquiry 15 (Autumn 1988), 
Cerarn, C. W. Archaeology of the Cinema. New York: Harcourt, B'i'ce and World, 1965.

Bibliography


Chanan, Michael. The Dream that Kicks, The Prehistory and Early Yea>:'> ofCinema in Britain. London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1980.
Changeux,Jean-Pierre. Neuronal Mane The Biology ofMind. Trans. Lawrence Garey. New
York Oxford Univ. Press, 1985.
Clark, T.). The Painting ofModern Life, Paris in the A11 ofManet and His Followers. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1984.

Clarke, Edwin, and L. S. Jacyna. Nineteenth Century Origins of Neuroscientific Concepts.
Berkeley, Univ. o f California Press, 1987.
·
Comolli,Jean-Louis. "Machines of the Visible." In The Cinematic Apparatus, ed. Teresa de
Lauretis. London, Macmillan, 1980.
Comolli,Jean-Louis. "Technique et ideologie." cabiersdu cinema 229 (May-June 1971),

Constable, W. G., and). G. Links. Canaletto. 2 vols. Oxford, Clarendon, 1976.
Corboz, Andre. Canalettoc Una Venezia immaginaria. 2 vols. Milan' Electra, 1985.
Crary, Jonathan. "Eclipse of the Spectacle." In A11 After Modernism, Rethinking Representation, ed. Brian Wallis. Boston' David Godine, 1984, 
Crary, Jonathan. "Spectacle, Attention, Counter-Memory." October 50, (Fall 1988).

Darnisch, Hubert. L 'ongine de Ia perspet;tive. Pari" Flamrnarion, 1988.
Danto, Arthur. "The Representational Character of Ideas and the Problem of the External
World." In Descartes, Critical and lntetpretive Essays, ed. Michael Hooker. Baltimore, John Hopkins Univ. Press, 1978.
Debord, Guy. The Society of the Spectacle. Trans. Donald Nicholson-Smith. New York
Swerve Editions, 1990.
De Landa, Manuel. War in the Age ofIntelligent Machines. New York, ZOne Books, 1990.
Deleule, Didier, and Fran<;ois Guery. Le corps productif Paris, Marne, 1972.
Deleuze, Gilles. Cinema lc The Movement-mage. Trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Barbara
Habberjarn. Minneapolis, Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1986.
Deleuze, Gilles. Foucault. Trans. Sean Hand. Minneapoli" University of Minnesota Press,
Deleuze, Gilles. Le plic Leilmiz etle baroque. Paris' Minuit, 1988.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guattari. Anti-Oedipus. Trans. Mark Seem, Robert Hurley, and
Helen Lane. New York, Viking, 1978.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Felix Guauari. A Thousand Plateaus. Trans. Brian Massumi. Minneapolis, Univ. of Minnesota Press, I 987.
de Man, Paul. Blindness and Insight, Essays in the Rhetoric ofContemporary Criticism. New
York, Oxford Univ. Press, 1974.
Dijksterhuis, E. J.. ed. Descartes et le cartesianism hollandaise Etudes et documents. Pari"
Presses Universitaires de France, 1950.
Dreyfus, Hubert, and Paul Rabinow. Michel Foucault, Beyond Hermeneutics and Structuralism. Chicago, Univ. of Chicago Press, 1982.
Dunkel, Harold B. Herbart and Herbartismc An Educational Ghost Story. Chicago, Univ. of
Chicago Press, 1970.
Earle, Edward W. Points ofView, The Stereoscope in AmericacA Cultural History. Rochester,
Visual Studies Workshop, 1979.
Eder,Josef Maira. History ofPhotography. Trans. Edward Epstein. New York Dover, 1945.
Rpt. of 4th edition, 1932.

Bibliography


Escoubas, Eliane, "L'oeil (du) teinturier." Critique 37, no. 418 (March 1982), 
Feyerabend, Paul. Against Method. London' Verso, 1975.
Feyerabend, Paul. Problems of Empiricism. 2 vols. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press,
Fineberg,). A. 1be Life of]. M. W Turner R.A. 2nd. ed. Oxford, Oxford Univ. Press, 1966.
Fink, Daniel A. "Vermeer's Use of Camera Obscura' A Comparative Study." Art Bulletin 53
no. 4 (December 1971 ), 
Finley, Gerald E. "Turner, An Early Experiment with Colour Theory." journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institute 30 , 
Finley, Gerald E. "Turner's Colour and Optics, A New Route in 1822."journal ofthe Warburg and Courtauld Institute 36 ( 1973), 
Fontenay, Elisabeth de. Diderotc Reason and Resonance. Trans. Jeffrey Mehlman. New
York, Braziller, 1982.
Forbes, Eric G. "Goethe's Vision of Science." In Common Denominators in Art and Sci-

ence, ed. Martin Pollock. Aberdeen, Aberdeen Univ. Press, 1983, 
Foucault, Michel. 1be Birth of the Clinic, An Archaeology of Medical Perception. Trans.
A. M. Sheridan Smith. New York Pantheon, 1975.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish, 1be Birth ofthe Prison. Trans. Alan Sheridan. New
York Pantheon, 1979.
Foucault, Michel. Madness and Civilization, A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason.
Trans. Richard Howard. New York Pantheon, 1973.
Foucault, Michel. 1be Order of 7bings. New York Pantheon, 1973.
Foucault, Michel. PowerKnowledge, Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972-1977.
Ed. Colin Gordon. New York Pantheon, 1980.
Frankel, Edward. "Corpuscular Optics and the Wave Theory of Light, The Science and Politics of a Revo lutio n in Physics." Social Studies ofScience 6 , 
Fried, Michae l. Absorption and 1beatricairy, Painting and Beholder In the Age ofDiderot.
Berkeley, Univ. of California Press, 1980.
Fritzsche, Hellmuth Allwill. Bernardo Beotto genannt Canaletto. Magdeburg, August
Hopfer, 1936.
Gage, John. "Turner's Annotated Books, Goethe's 'Theory of Colour."' Turner Studies 4
(Winter 1982), 
Garin, Eugenio. Italian Humanism' Philosophy and Civic Life in the Renaissance. Trans.
Peter Munz. New York Harper and Row, 1965.
Gearhart, Suzanne. Open Boundary of History and Fiction, A Critical Approach to the
French Enlightenment. Princeton, Princeton Univ. Press, 1984.
Gerlach, Joachim. "Ober neurologische Erkenntniskritik." Schopenhauer-jahriJuch 53
, 
Gernsheim, Helmut and Alison. 1be History ofPhotography. 2nd. ed. London' Thames and
Hudson, 1969.
Gemsheim, Helmut and Alison. L. M. Daguerrec 1be History of the Diorama and the
Daguerreotype. New York Dover, 1968.
Gill, AT. "Early Stereoscopes." 1be Photographic journal. 109 , 
Gioseffi, Decio. CanalettocII quaderno delle Galerie Veneziane e l'impiego della camera
ottica. Instituto de Storia dell' Ane Antica e Moderna, no. 91, Univ. of Trieste 1959.


Bibtwgraphy

Gliozzi, Mario. "L'invenzione della camera oscura." Arcbivo di Storia Della Scien:za vol. xiv,

no. 2 (April-June 1932), 
Gowing, Llwrence. Turner, Imagination and Reality. New York: Museum of Modern Art,
Gowing, Llwrence. Venneer. 1952. Rpt. New York: H:uper and Row, 1970.
Gregory, R L. Eye and Brain, The Psychology of Seeing. 3d. ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
Guillaume, Marc. Eloge du desordre. Paris: Gallimard, 1978.
Hacaen, Henri, and G. Lanteri-Laura. Evolutions des connaissances et des doctrines sur les
localisations cerebrates. Paris: Desclee de Brouwer, 1977.
Hacking, Ian. Representing and lnteroening, Introductory Topics in Scientific Tradition
and Change. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1979.
Haigh, Elizabeth Luckha. Xavier Bicbat and the Medical Theory ofthe Eighteenth Cenrury.
London: Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine, 1984.
Hallyn, Fernand. The Poetic Structure ofthe World, Copernicus and Kepler. Trans. Donald
Leslie. New York: Zone Books, 1990.
Harman, P. M. Energy, Force, and Matter, The Conceptual Development ofNineteenth-Century Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1982.
Harries, Karsten. "Descartes, Perspective and the Angelic Eye." Yale French Studies 49,
, 
Heidegger, Martin. The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. Trans. William
Lovitt. New York: Harper and Row, 1977.
Heidegger, Martin. Schelling's Treati'se on the Essence of Human Freedom. Trans. Joan
Stambaugh. Athens,Ohio: Ohio Univ. Press, 1985.
Henry, Michel. Philosophie et pbenomenologie du corps, essai sur 'ontologie biranienne.
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1965.
Hess, Gunter, "Panorama und Denkmal: Erinnerung als Denkform Zwischen Vo rmarz und
Grunderzeit." In Literatur in der sozialen Bewegung, Aujsatze und Forschungsherichte zum 19. ]abrhundert, ed. Gunter Hantzschel and George Jager. Tubingen:
Max Niemeyer, 1977.
H0ffding, Harald. History ofModern Philosophy. 2 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1955.
Horkheimer, Max, and Theodo r Adorno. Dialectic of Enlightenment. Trans. John Cumming. New York: Seabury, 1972.
Husserl, Edmund. The Crisis of European Science and Transcendental Phenomenology.
Trans. David Carr. Evanston: Northwestern Univ. Press, 1970.
Hu"ley, Aldous. Themes and Variations. London : Chauo and Windus, 1950.
Huyssen, Andreas. After the Great Divide, Modernism, Mass Culture, Postmodernism.
Bloomington: Univ. of Indiana Press, 1986.
Irigaray, Luce. Speculum of the Other Woman. Trans. Gillian C. Gill. Ithaca: Cornell Univ.
Press, 1985.
Jameson, Fredric. The Ideologies ofHistory, Essays 1971-1986. 2 vols. Minneapolis: Univ.
of Minnesota Press, 1988.
Jameson, Fredric. The Political Unconscious' Narrative as a Socially Symbolic Act. Ithaca:
Cornell Univ. Press, 1981.
Jay, Martin. "Scopic Regimes o f Modernity." In Vision and Visualily, ed. Hal Foster. Seaule:
Bay Press, 1988.

Bibliography


Junod, Phillipe. Transparence et opacite.- Essai sur les fondaments tbeoriques de 'art moderne. Lausanne: L'Age d'Homme, 1975.
Kofman, Sarah. Camera obscura de l'ideologie. Paris: Galilee, 1973.
Koller, Gottfried. Das Leben des Biologen johannes Muller. Stuttgart: Wissenschaftliche
Verlagsgesellschaft, 1958.
Krauss, Rosalind. "Antivision." October 36 (Spring 1986), 
Krauss, Rosalind. "The Blink of an Eye," In 7be States of 7beory.- History, Art, and Critical
Discourse, ed. David Caroll. New York: Columbia Univ. Press, I990.
Krauss, Rosalind. "The Impulse to See." In Vision and Visuality, ed. Hal Foster. Seattle: Bay
Press, 1988.
Krauss, Rosalind. "Photography's Discursive Spaces: LandscapeNiew." Art journal 42,
no. 4 (Winter 1982), 
Kroeber, Karl. "Romantic Historicism: The Temporal Sublime." In Images ofRomanticism.Verbal and Visuall\[finities, ed. Karl Kroeber and William Walling. New Haven: Yale
Univ. Press. 1978.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 7be Essential Tension.- Selected Studies in Scientific Tradition and
Change. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1977.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 7beStructureofScienti.ficRevolutions. 2nd ed. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
.Press, 1970.
Kuyper, Eric de, and Emile Poppe. "Voir et regarder." Communications 34 ,

Lacan,jacques. The Four Fundamental Concepts ofPsycho-Analysis. Trans. Alan Sheridan.
New York: Norton, 1978.
Lauxtermann, P. F. H. "Five Decisive Years: Schopenhauer's Epistemology as Reflected in
his Theory of Color." Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science 18, no. 3
, 
Leary, David, E. "The Historical Foundations ofHerbart's Mathematization of Psychology."
journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 16, 
Leary, David E. "The Philosophical Development of the' Conception of Psychology in Germany, 1780-1850." journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 14 ,

Leclerc, Helene. "La scene d'illusion et l'hegemonie du thelltre a l'italienne."In Histoire des
spectacles, ed. Guy Dumur. Paris: Gallimard, 1965, 
Lenoble, Robert. Histoire de 'idee de nature. Paris: Editio ns Michel Albin, 1969.
Lindberg, David C. 7beories of Vision from AJ-Kindi to Kepler. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
Press, 1976.
Lindsay, Jack. Turner.- His Life and Work. New York: Harper and Row, 1966.
Liiwith, Karl. From Hegel to Nietzsche.- 7be Revolution in Nineteenth-Century Thought.
Trans. David E. Green. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964.
Lukacs, Georg. History and Closs Consciousness. Trans. Rodney Livingstone. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1971.
Lyotard,Jean-Fran<;ois. Discours, Figure. Paris: Klincksieck, 1978.
Lyotard, Jean-Fran<;ois. 7be Postmodem Condition.- A Report on Knowledge. Trans. Geoff
Bennington and Brian Massumi. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1984.
Lyorard, )ean-Fran<;ois. "The Sublime and the Avant-Garde." Artjorum 22, (April 1984),



Bibliography

Magnus, Rudolf. Goethe as a Scientist. 1906. Trans. Heinz Norden. New York Henry Schuman, 1949.
Mandelbaum, Maurice. History, Man, and Reason.· A Study in Nineteenth-Century 7bought.
Baltimore: johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1971.
Mandelbaum, Maurice. "The Physiological Orientation of Schopenhauer's Epistemology."
In Schopenhauer.- His Philosophical Achievement, ed. Michael Fox. Sussex: Harvester,
Marin, Louis. Portrait of the King. Trans. Martha Houle, Minneapolis: Univ. of MinneSOta
Press, 1988.
Markovits, Francine. "Diderot, Merian, et l'aveugle." In J.B. Merian, Sur le probleme de
Molyneux. Paris: Flammarion, 1984.
Mayor, A Hyatt. "The Photographic Eye." Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin 5, no. I
(Summer 1946), 
Mehlman,Jeffrey. Cataract.- A Study in Diderot. Middletown, Conn.: Weselyan Univ. Press,
Meredieu, Florence de. "De l'obscenite photographique." Traverses 29 , 
Merleau-Pomy, Maurice . The Primacy of Perception. Ed. James M. Edie. Evansville, Ill.:
Northwestern Univ. Press, 1964.
Metz, Christian. Film Language. Trans. Michael Taylor. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1974.
Meyerson, Emile. Identity and Reality. Trans. Kate Lowenberg. New York: Dover, 1962.
Mitchell, W.). T. Iconology.- Image, Text, Ideology. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1986.
Mitry, Jean. Histoire du cinema. 2 vols. Paris: Editions Universitaires, 1967.
Morgan, M.). Molyneux's Questio n.- Vision, Touch and the Philosophy ofPerception. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1977.
Neale, Steve. Cinema and Technology.- Image, Sound, Colo ur. Bloomington: Indiana Univ.
Press, 1985.
Ne ite, W. "The Cologne Diorama." History ofPhotography 3 (April 1979), 
Nichols, Bill, and Susan). Lederman. "Flicker and Motion in Film." In The Cinematic Apparatus, ed. Teresa de Lauretis and Stephen Heath. London.- Macmillan, 1980,

Nisbet, H. B. Goethe and the Scientific Tradition. London: Univ. of London Press, 1972.
Oettermann, Stephen. Das Panorama. Munich: Syndikat, 1980.
Ostwald, Wilhelm. Goethe, Schopenhauer, und die Farbenkhre. Leipzig: Verlag Unesma,
Panofsky, Erwin. "Die Perspelaive als 'Symbolische Form ... Vonrage der Bihliothek Warburg (1924-25 ), 
Paulson, Ronald. "Turne r 's Graffiti: The Sun and Its Glosses." In Images of Romanticism.Verlxzl and Visual Affinities, ed. Karl Kroeber and William Walling. New Haven: Yale
Univ. Press, 1978.
Petrysak, Nicholas G. ''Tabula Rasa: Its Origins and Implications."journal ofthe History of
the Behavioral Sciences 17 , 
Padro, Michael. The Critical Histor.ions ofArt. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1982.
Padro, Michael. The Manifold in Perception.- Theories of Art .from Kant to Hildebrand.
Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1972.
Pomian, Krzysztof. L'ordredu temps. Paris: Gallimard, 1984.
Prigogine , Ilya, and Isabelle Stengers. Order Out of Chaos. New York: Bantam, 1984.

Bibliography


Quigley, Manin. Magic Shadows, The Story of the Origin ofMotion Pictures. Washington,
D.C.: Georgetown Univ. Press, 1948.
Quintavalle, Anuro. "The Philosophical Context of Riegl's 'Stilfragen. "' in On the Methodology of Architectural History, ed. Demetri Porphyrios. New York: St. Man in's,
Rabinow, Paul. French Modern, Norms and Forms ofthe Social Environment. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 1989.
Rajchman, john. "Foucault's An of Seeing." October 44 (Spring 1988), 
Reiss, Timothy J. The Discourse 61 Modernism. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ. Press. 1982
Ricoeur, Paul, 7be Conflict of Interpretations. Trans. Don Idhe. Evanston: Nonhwestern
Univ. Press, 1974.
Rienstra, Miller H. "Giovanni Battista della Porta and Renaissance Science." Ph.D. diss.,

Univ. of Michigan, 1%3.
Rony, Richard. Philosophy and the Min-or ofNature. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1979.
Rose, Nikolas. "The Psychological Complex: Mental Measurement and Social Administration." Ideology and Consciousness 5 (Spring 1979), 
Sadoul, Georges. Histoire generate du ciru!ma. 6 vols. 1948. Rpt. Paris: Denoel, 1973.
Sarduy, Severo. Ban-oco. Paris: Seuil, 1975.
Sanre,jean-Paul. The Family Idiot, Gustave Faubert 1821-1857. Trans. Carol Cosman.
Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1981.
Sauvage, Leo. L'affaire Lumii!re: EnquRte sur les origines du cinhna. Paris: Lherminier,
Schivelbusch, Wolfgang. 7be Railway journey, Trains and Travel in the 19th Century.
Trans. Anselm Hollo. New York: Urizen, 1979.
Schulz, juergen. 'Jacopo de'Barbari's View of Venice: Map Making and Moralized Geography Before the Year 1500." Art Bulletin 60 , 
Schwarz, Heinrich. Art and Photography Foreruntu!TS and Influences. Chicago: Univ. of
Chicago Press, 1985.
Sekula, Alan. Photography A,gainst the Grain.· Essays and Photoworks 1973- 1983. Halifax:
The Press of Nova Scotia College of An and Design, 1984.
Sepper, Dennis L. Goethe contra Newton.· Polemics and the Project for a New Science of
Color. cambridge: Univ. of Cambridge Press, 1988.
Serres, Michel. La communication. Paris: Minuit, 1969.
Serres, Michel. La systeme de Leibniz et ses modees nuubematiques. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1%8.
Serres, Michel. La traduction. Paris: Minuit, 1974.
Seymour, Charles Jr. "Dark Chamber and Light-Filled Room: Ve rmeer and the Camera
Obscura." Art Bulletin 46, no. 3 (September 1964), 
Silliman, R H. "Fresnel and the Emergence of Physics as a Discipline." Historical Studies
in the Physical Sciences 4 , 
Sirnmel, Georg. 7be Philosophy ofMoney. Trans. Tom Bottomore and David Frisby. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1978.
Simon, Gerard. ''A propos de Ia theorie de Ia perception visuelle chez Kepler et Descanes."
In Proceedings ojXllltb lnJernationa Congress ofthe History ofScience, Moscow: Editions Naouka, 1974, 
Simon, Gerard. u regard, 'etre et l'apparence dans 'optique de 'aruiquile. Paris: Seuil,


Bibliography

Snyder, joel. "Picturing Vision." Critical Inquiry 6 (Spring 1980), 
Sternberger, Dolf. Panorama of the Nineteenth Century. New York Urizen, 1977.
Tagg, john. "The Currency of PhO!ography," In Thinking Photography. Ed. Victor Burgin.
London.- Macmillan, 1982.
Temkin, Oswei. "The Philosophical Background of Magendie's Physiology." Bulletin ofthe
History ofMedicine 20 , 
Tiedemann, Rolf. "Dialectics at a Standstill.- Approaches to the Passagen-Werk." In On Walter Benjamin.· Critical Essays and Recollections, ed. Gary Smith. Cambrid!e, Mass..MIT Press, I 988.
Toulmin, Stephen. "The Inwardness of Mental Life," Critical Inquiry (Autumn 1979),

TUrbayne, Colin Murray. 7be Myth ofMetaphor. New Haven.- Yale Univ. Press, 1962.
Vartanian, Aram. Diderot and Descartes.- A Study of Scientific Naturalism in the Enlight-

enment. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press, 1953.
Vattimo, Gianni. 7be End of Modernity. Trans. )on R Snyder. Baltimore.- johns Hopkins
Univ. Press, 1988.
Virilio, Paul. L'horizon negatif Paris.- Galil<!e, 1984.
Wells, George A "Goethe's Qualitative Optics." 7be journal of the History of Ideas 32
, 
Wheelock, Arthur K. "Constantijn Huygens and Early Attitudes Toward the Camera
Obscura." History ofPhotography I, no. 2 (April 1977), 
Wheelock, Arthur K. Per>pective, Optics, and Delft Artists Around 1650. New York Garland,
Wheelock, Arthur K. Vermeer. New York.- Abrams, 1988.
White, Hayden. Metahistory.- 7be Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century Europe.
Baltimore.- Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1973.
Wolman, Benjamin B. "The Historical Role 
of Contemporary Psychology, ed. Benjamin B. Wolman. New York Harper and Row,

Woodward, William R. "Fechner's Panpsychism.- A Scientific Solution to the Mind-Body
Problem." journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 8 (October 1972),

Woodward, William R. "Hermann Lotze's Critique ofjohannes Muller's Doctrine of Specific
Sense." Medical History 19, no. 2 (April1975), 
Worringer, Wilhelm. Abstraction and Empathy. Trans. Michael Bullock. New York International Universities Press, 1948.
Yolton, john W. Perceptual Acquaintance from Descartes to Reid. Minneapolis.- Univ. of
Minnesota Press, 1984.
Young, Robert M. Mind, Brain, and Adaptation in the Nineteenth Century.- Cerebral Localization and its Biological Contextfrom Galto Ferrier. Oxford.- Clarendon, 1970.

Index

Addison, joseph, 64n84
Adorno, Theodor, 11, 57n69, 77, 132, 137
Aesthetics, 8, 12, 23, 75-76,83-85, 116,
143nl5
Afterimage, retinal, 16, 21, 6S-69, 97-98,
102- 107, 118, 139-141, 142nl2,
Alberti, Leon Battista, 86. See also
Perspective, Renaissance
Alhazen, 27
Alliez, Eric, 142nl4
Alpers, Svetlana, 32n9, 34-36, 66n85
Ampere, Andre-Marie, 100
Analogy, 12, 37, 63
Anamorphosis, 33, 50n54
Angels, 142- 143
Anschaulicbkeit, I I
Antiquity, 17, 22, 93, 97
Arcades, 23
Architecture, 20, 39
baroque, 51n56, 52n6I
Aristotle, 27, 98
Art, 9, lln11, 29, 34-36, 66, 83-84, 96,
137-138, I43nl5. See also
Cinema; Painting; Photography
eighteenth-ce ntury, 52-54. 62-66
historiography of, 3, 5, 21-23, 25-26,
32-36, 149
late antique, 22
nineteenth-century, 3-4, 21-22, 96,
132, 138--143
object, 5, 8, 21 , 32
seventeenth-century, 43- 47
"Assemblages," 8, 30-32, 112, 126

Associationism, 57n72
Attention and attentiveness, !6, 18, 24, 8485, %, 102, 141, 149
Avant-garde, 3-4, 95-96, 126, I43nl 5

Babbage, Charles, I 7n2 I
Bacon, Roger, 27
Barbari,]acopo de', 52-53
View of Venice, 53
Banhes, Roland, 129
Bataille, Georges, 147n20
Baudelaire, Charles, 20, I 13-114, I !6
Baudrillard,]ean, 11-12, 17n22
Behaviorism, 89n51 , 100, 148
Bell, Sir Charles, 81, 89
Bellotto, Bernardo, 126
Benjamin, Walter, I I, 19-21, 23, 30n5, 112,
132
Bentham, jeremy, 18
Bergson, Henri, 29, 72, 85n46, 89n53,
98n2, 146
Berkeley, George, 39, 55, 57-58, 59. 62
Bernal, ]. D., 13ln50
Bernini, Gianlorenzo, 53n63
Bichat, xavie r, 78--79, 81, 89
Biology, 73, 77. See also Canguilhem,
Georges; Physiology; Science
Blake, William, 70
Blindness, 58-60, 66. See also Molyneux
problem
caused by sun, I 07, 141
Blind spot, 75, 104
Blumenberg, Hans, 50n55


Index

Body, 2, 3. 10, 15-17, 18,69-74.88-89,98,
133. J36n57, 141, 147. 149-150.
See also Brain; Eye; Knowledge, of
the body; Nervous system; Senses
capacities of, 73. 84-85, 89, 92, 94-95.
132. 141
denial of, 71. 78, 84-85. 136
instincts of, 77
motililf of. 72
"visionary" potencial of. 75, 104, 139141,150
Boole, George, 147
Bourgeoisie, ll, ll2, 125
Brain, 75. 76-77, 83-84, 119. See also
Nervous system

localization of functions in, 81-83
Brewster, Sir David, 113, 116, 118. 120122, 133. 141
Burckhardt, Jacob, 22n30
Cabanel, Alexandre, 22
Camera obscura, 8, 12-14, 24, 26-66, 69.
86, 91. 92, 98, 113. 127. 133.
137-139. 143-145, 149
in anistic practice, 29, 32-34, 43n45.
137-138
closed apenure of, 68- 69. 70
as epistemological model, 14, 27-32.
38, 40- 47, 51, 55. 57. 86, 99. 137
as eye, 27, 33. 35, 47, 49, 129
as metaphor, 29, 35. 42, 51
origins of, 34nl4
as paradigm, 8, 14, 27, 35. 40, 42, 51,
91. 129. 136. 143. 145
ponable. 28, 30
projections of, 27. 32-34, 38, 55-56
receptivity of, 51 , 75
suppression of subjectivity in, 39, 60,
138. 139, 141, 145
various apparatuses of, 27, 30, 31, 40
Canaletto, Antonio, 52, 126
Piazza San Marco, 54
Canguilhem, Georges, 15n20, 73, 78, 131
Capiulism, 10, 12, 24, 94. See also
Bourgeoisie; Commodity
Canesianism, 46n46, 48-50, 60n79, 63--64
Cassirer, Ernst, 38, 56-57, 69n3

Catoptrics, 64

Cezanne, Paul, 66, 95, 96n63. 126
Chardin, Jean-Baptiste, 62-66
Basket of Wild Strawberries, 63
Boy Blowing Bubbles, 65
Chesleden boy, 66
Cinema, I, 4, 26, 27, 127n45
history of, 8, 26, I 10
sound in, !8n26
Clark, T. ).  96n63
Class, 11-12. 21, 112, 125
Claude glasses, 131
Codes. 12, 96, 133-136
Coemistbese (coenesthesia), 72
Color, 74, 88, 104, 118, 141. See also
Afterimages
as subjective production, 68, 70-75,
104.139
Commodity, 10, II, 14, 19-20, 62, 112
Communication, 10, 12. 14
Condillac, Etienne de, 58n72, 59, 73, 75,
Conic sections. 50-51
Consumption, 10, 13. 14, 18-19.20-21 ,
132, 133-136
Copernican revolution, 50. 59
Copy, 12
Coumerfeit, 12

Courbet, Gustave, 22, 126
Ladies of the Village, 126
7be Meeting, 126
Culture, mass visual. 3-4, 5. 9. 14, 16-18,
104, 127. 132-138
popular, 5, 106, 109-110, 112, 118,
131n50
sciemific, 5. 18. 23-24, 35. 104, 112,
131n50, 133
Daguerre, louis, 112

Death, 24, 78, 139
Debord. Guy, 2, 18-19
Defoe, Daniel, 48n53
Delacroix, Eugene, 22
De Landa, Manuel, 13nl4
Delaroche, Paul, 22
Deleuze, Gilles, 8, IOnS, 18n25, 30-31,
5ln56, 56n68, 67, 126, 131n52


Index

Della Porta, Giovanni Bauista, 36-3S
De Man, Paul, 95n61
Denis, Maurice, 95
Descartes, Rene, 35, 42n39, 43, 46--50, 5556, 60, 139 See also Cartesian ism
Desire, 7S, 113-114
control of, 84- S5 (see also Subject,
control of)
DeterrilOrialization, 10n8

Diderot, Denis, 57n70, 59-60, 62, 124
Dioptrics, 64, 104
Dioramas, 112-113, 114, 122
Discontinuity, 3-5, 7, 13, 22, 26--27, 30-32,
66, 112
Distance, perception of, 42, 59, 62, IIS119, 129, 132
Dubois·Reymond, Emil, 93
Duration, 9Sn2, 101, 104
quantifiable, 101-102 (see also Time;
Vision, temporality of)
Eastlake, Sir Charles, 90n55
Economy, 2, 9-10, 13, 94, 149
Education. See Pedagogy
Electromagnetism, SS, 106-107. See also
Energy
Empiricism, 9, ! 6, 29, 35, 57-59, 79n31
British, 26, 72
Encyclopedie, 32-33, 56
Energy, 72, 88-S9, 139, 14S. See also
Electromagnetism;

Thermodynamics
Engels, Friedrich, 114
Enlightenment, 56, 57n69, 60n79
Entertainment, 29, 33. 104, !06
mass, 14, 22, 112
Episteme, 35n16
Epistemology, 70, 79, 91- 92, 98, 102, 120.
See also Camera obscura. as
epistemological model
Equivalence, 12, 14
Euclid, 27, 13Sn2
Extension, 46--47, 62-63, 74
Exteriority. See Interiority
Eye, 2, 19, 24, 26, 43, 47-48,72, 74, 79, 92,
94-96,98-99, 112-113, 129-131 ,
13S, 139, 142- 143. See also

Afterimages, retinal; Sensation;
Senses; Vision

and camera obscura, 47-4S, 50
"innocent," 66, 95-96
irritability of, 74, 104, 120n37
muscular movements of, 72, 104

Faraday, Michael, 88, 106-107, 111-112
Faraday wheel, 106-107, 109
Fatigue, 73, 104. See also Artention and
anemiveness
Fechner, Gustav, 101, Ill, 141-149
Fechner's Law, 145-146
Feher, Michel, 142n 14
Feyerabend, Paul, 6n3, 25
Fiedler, Konrad, 22n30, S2
Film. See Cinema
Fingerprints, 104n!7
Flilneur, 21
Flourens, Pierre, Sl-S2
Foucault, Michel, 6n2, 15-IS, 19, 37, 41 ,
56-57, 70, 71-72, 74nl6, 79, 112,
139n5, 145n16, 147, 148
France,l7-IS, 20, 117, 123
Fresnel, Augustin jean, S6-88
Freud, Sigmund, 29. 148n23
Fried, Michael, 66n85
Friedlande r, Walter, 23n31
Friedrich, Caspar David, 22
Galileo Galilei, 26
Gall, Franz joseph, Sl
Genealogy, 6n2
Geometry, 59-60, 62-63
Gerome, jean·Leon, 22
Gleyre, Marc Gabriel Ch., 22
Goethe, jo hann Wolfgang von , 14, 67- 74,
88, 92, 97, 99- 100, 101, 102,
!04n16, 107, 111, 13S, 139n5,
142nl4, 147
Gombrich, Ernst, 32n9
Gowing, Lawrence, 13S
Guauari, Felix, IOnS, 13ln52
Guillaume, Marc, IOnS
Hacking , lan, 17n21
Hall, Marshall, 81, S3n41


Index

Harris, John, 33n10
Hartley, David, 58n72
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 30n3,
99-100
Heidegger, Martin, 55-56, 137, 143nl4
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 85-86, 88, 89,
91,93-94, 120, 124, 148
Herbart,Johann Friedrich, 100-102, 145
Hildebrand, Adolf von, 22n30
Hobbes, Thomas, 93n57
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 133n55
Horkheimer, Max, 57n69
Horner, William George, 110
Hume, David, 42
Husser!, Edmund, 41
Huygens, Christian, 86
Illusio ns, 16, 33, 91-92, 96, 118, 122, 129,
133
Imagery, 13, 17, 19, 23, 96, 120-122, 132,
149-150. See also Stimulus,
arbitrary relation to sensation

fabricated, 13, 17, 21, 127-1 28, 129
illusory, 92
photographic, 13, 16, 21, 118, 127-128,
pornographic, 127
"reality" of, 32n9, 122
tangib ility of, 19, 55, 59, 122, 127-128,
Impressionism, 3, 22, 36
Industrialization, IOnS, 12, 15n20, 20, 112,
116,131, 150.Seealso

Kepler, Johannes, 27, 38, 50n55, 86, 119,
Kircher, Athanasius, 33n11, 70
Knowledge
of the body, 14, 15-17, 19, 26, 59, 7071, 78 , 88, 104-105, 112, 119, 147,
(see also Physiology)
eighteenth-century, 51, 57n69, 62-64,
69-70, 74, 89, 95, 98, 129-131
empirical, 14, 26, 35, 41-42, 57, 62,7879, 91 , 93, 101, 110, 141
nineteenth-century reorganization of,

7, 9, 11, 15-16, 19, 59, 62, 69, 70,
79-80, 98, 118, 138, 147-148
perceptible, 57, 62, 70, 77
rational, 11n10, 29, 35, 40, 41, 43-44,
46-47, 53, 57n69, 62, 77, 137
of space, 59, 62, 118, 129, 132
transcend ental, 42, 48
validated by senses, II, 60, 62-64
of vision, 14, 16, 26, 70, 88, 139n6
visuality-cemered, 27, 38
Kobel!, Wilhelm von, 22
Krauss, Rosalind, 136n57
Kuhn, Tho mas S., 17n21
Kwinter, Sanford, 34n13

Lacan, Jacques. 39, 42n39
Lamp, metapho r of, 9
Language, 10, 96, 143, 148n23
universal, 37, 48n51, 55
Leclerc, Helene, 53n63
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 35, 50-52, 56
Lens, 26, 36, 47
Modernization; Rationalization
Leonardo Da Vinci, 27, 138
Industrial revo lutio n, 15
lngres, Jean-Auguste-Do minique, 22
Light, 26, 90-91 , 138
Instrume ntalism , nine teenth-century, 24, 131
theories o f, 86, 138, 142- 143 (see a lso
Electro magnetism ; Optics;
Inte rio rity, 24, 38-39, 46-47, 68, 72, 75,
Stimulus)
97-98, 137, 148n23. See also
Observer, imeriorized
Lipps, Theodor, 81
Irritability, 23, 83. See also Stimulus
Literature, 5, 9, 143n15
Locke, John, 35, 40-43, 51, 55, 58, 59, 74Jameson, Fredric, 36n20, 94n59
98, 99, 100
Lotze, He rman, 91
Kaleidoscope, 113-116, 115, 139
Lukacs, Georg , 10, 39n29
Kant, Immanuel, 69-70, 74, 76-n, 83, 92,
Lyotard, Jean-Fram;ois, 50n54, 7ln9,
143n1 5

Index

Mach, Ernst, 76, 142
Machines, in relation to vision, 2, 31, 129131, 132
Magendie, Franc;ois, 81, 89
Magic, 38
Magic lantern, 33, 117, 132
Maine de Biran, Franc;ois-Pierre, 72-73,

Mandelbaum, Maurice, 57n72
Maner, Edouard, 3, 22
The Execution ofMaximilian, 126
View of the International Exhibition,
Marey, Etienne:)ules, 136n56
Marin, Louis, 52n58
Marx, Karl, !On9, 13, 29, 94, 113-116, 129131
Mass media, 1-2, 4, 5, 18. See also Cinema;
Entertainment; Television

Maxwell, James Clerk, 88
Measurement. See Quantification

Meissonier,J.-L.-E., 22
Memory, visual, 20
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 42n39
Meryon, Charles, 20
Metz, Christian, 127n45
Microscopes, 129, 131n50
Millais, John Everett, 22
Mimesis, 4, 9, 12, 22, 41
Mind, 43, 55, 81, 99, 137
and perception, 9, 122, 148
specialized operations of, 39,81-83
Mirror, metaphor of, 9

Modernism, 3-5, 126, 136, 150. See also
Avant-garde; Industrialization;
Rationalization
Mode rnity, 3, 9, IOnS, 11, 17, 18, 23, 69,
81, 94, 113, 127, 137, 143n15,
nineteenth-century, 3, 9, 15, 21, 21, 69,
74-75, 85, 94, 113, 126-127
twentieth-century, 3, 20
Modernization, 5, 10, 14-15, 19-20,24,
66,94-95. 113-116, 137, 147-149
Molyneux, William, 33n!O, 64n83
Molyne ux problem, 58-59, 66, 89, 95, 118
Monet, Claude, 66, 95


Money, 13, 149. See also Commodity;
Economy
Morelli, Giovanni, 21
Movement, 62, Ill, 112, 118
representation of, 33, 34
simulation of, 16, 104-112
Muller, Johannes, 81, 88-95, 142n!O, 145
Museums, 20-21, 23
Muybridge, Eadweard, 136n56
Naturalism, 32n9, 133-136
Naturphilosophie, 142
Nervous system, 76, 82-84, 93-94
localization of functions in, 81-83
"specific nerve energies" in, 89, 94, 145
Newton, Isaac, 26, 35, 40, 63-64, 74, 86,
See also Optics, Newtonian
Newton color wheel, 107
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 23-24, 39. 67, 78, 97,
111n23, 149
Normalization, 14, 15-16, 17n22
Object, 3, 11, 13, 19, 20, 23, 74-75, 84, 92,
107-109, 119-120, 122, 127128, ! 32, 137, 143
classical, 62-63
Observer, 1-3, 5, 6, 8, 10, 16, 23-24, 26,
36, 66, 88, 112, 120, 126, 127128, 136, 138, 145, 149- 150. See
also Subject
in relation to apparatus, 8, 30, 32, 41 ,
112-113, 129, 133, 136
artist-observer, 66, 94-96, 139
bodyof,15-16, 24, 41, 68, 75,112,
118-122, 128, 132-133. 145 (see
also Physiology)
cartesian, 32, 35n16, 48-50, 62-68, 98
classical mode l of, 3, 6, 8, 26, 33n11,
75, 92, 128
decentered, 50, 128
eighteenth-century, 6, 8, 26-27, 30, 40,
59, 129
eye of, 2, 42, 68, 97-98, !04, Ill, 118,
127-128
immobile, 109, 112-113, 129
interiority of problematized, 68, 75,

Index


Observer (cont.)
interiorized, 33n11, 34, 39, 46, 55, 68
Keplerian, 35, 50n55
mobile, 14, 19-20, 41, 113
"neutrality" of, 26, 27, 43n45, 72, 96
nineteenth-century, 6-7, 9, 10-11, 1314, 27, 32. 70, 88-89, 112, 118, 120,
129, 138. 149
observer-consumer, lln10, 13, 14, 18,
106, 127-128, 149
passivity of, 75, 132
Plotinian, 142-143
position of, 2, 19, 41, 46, 55, 69-70,
112, 120-122, 128-1 29, 137138, 149 (see also Viewpoint)
as producer of visual experience, 9, 69,
97-98, 104, 118, 132, 139
self-regulation of, 40, 42-43, 112, 133,
Oken, Lorenz, 142
Optic nerve, 75, 119
Optics, 26, 33n11, 48, 68, 71, 86-88, 89,
97, 133. 137
Cartesian, 35n16, 47-48, 64n85
geometrical, 16, 86, 97, 127, 137, 138
Goethe's, 67-74, 142n14, 147
Keplerian, 35, 38, 86
Newtonian, 40, 64, 68, 74, 86
physical, 29, 86-88
physiological, 16, 26, 70, 88, 139n6
Overbeck, Friedrich, 22

Painting, 5, 13, 19-20, 21-22, 32, 95. See
also individual painters by name
Italian, 35
modernist, 4-5, 14, 66, 149
nineteenth-century, 20- 23, 126
Northern, 32n9, 34-36, 43-47
panorama, 112-113
perspectival, 13, 114 (see also
Perspective)
proximity of objects in, 62-64, 122,
126
Renaissance, 22
Panofsky, Erwin, 35n17
Panopticon, 17-18

Paris, John, 105-106
Pascal, Blaise, 50
Pavlov, Ivan, 89n51, 92
Pedagogy, 15, 102
Peep-shows, 33n10, 131
Perception, 4-5, 6, 14, 19-20, 55, 57, 62,
92, 95n61, 96, 97, 138, 11,3, 145.
See also Senses; Touch; Vision
aesthetic, 83-84, 94, 143
early nineteenth-century models of,

95-96
effects of speed on, 104-113
and fatigue, 18, 73, 104
"objective," 84-85, 102-104, 137-138
as process, 73, 96, 98
"pure," 76, 78, 84, 95n61, 96, 136
quantification of, 19, 21, 81, 95, 100,
145
synthetic, 59, 60, 77, 118, 129, 139
"true," 97-98
Perspective, 33-34, 35nl7, 36, 41, 47,
48n52, 52, 55, 86, 119-120, 127-128
late quattrocento, 41n34
linear, 12, 26, 34, 41, 86, 124
Renaissance, I, 26, 86
"Phantasmagoria," 132-133, 136
of equality, II
Phenakistiscope, 14, 16, 107, 108, 109-110,
113, 116n30, 120, 129, 132, 141
Phenomenology, 6n2
Philosophy, 8, 9, 14, 16. See also Camera
obscura, as epistemological model;
Epistemology
Photography, I, 4, 13-14, 19, 20, 27, 36,
99, 116-118, 125, 127, 133-136
history of, 5, 8, 16, 26, 31-32, 118
Physics, 63-64, 88, 131n52, 139
Physiology, 71-85, 89- 94, 112. See also
Optics, physiological
advances in, 14, 78, 88
nineteentl\-century, 14, 15-17, 59, 70,
76, 81-83, 85, 89, 112, 118
Plateau,]oseph, 107, 111,112, 141
Plato, 25
Plotinus, 142-143
Pornography, 127
Posi£ivism, 9

Index

Power, 3, 4, 6-8, 12, 15, 18, 26, 79-80, 118,
147, 148
institutional, 2, 3, 8, 9, 14-16, 17-18,
79n32, 102
Print viewing box, 131
Productivism, 9, 10n9, 32, 116, 147n20
Proust, Marcel, 43
Psychology, 73. 89n51, 100, 102, 141n9,
See also Behaviorism
physiological, 73, 85, 89, 93. 100
nineteenth-century, 14, 15, 59, 89, 93,
Purkinje,Jan, 102-104, Ill, 11 2,118
Quantification, 15-16, 17, 19, 21, 81,8485,95, 100-107, 112, 142, 145
Quattrocento, 25
Railroads, 11, 20, 23, 106, 111
Rationalism, llniO, 29, 35, 40, 43-44,
S7n69, 62, 77, 137
Rationalization, 2, 10, llniO, 14-15, 16,
13B, 145, 147, ISO
of labor, 10, IS-16, 85, 94, 131
of movement, 16, 85, 113
of perception, 16, 24, as. 137-138,145
of sensation, 24, 95, 112, 145-149
"Realism," 4- S, 9, 14, 17, 32n9, 120, 126
Reality, lln!O, 32n9, 92, 112, 122, 127n4S,
143niS, 145
exterior, 71

illusory, 40, 132, 142niS
Referentiality, 4, 14, 19, 23, 91, 98, 113
Reflex, 76, 78, 82-83, 92
Reid, Thomas, S8n74
Reification, 10, 11n11
Rembrandt van Rijn, 64n85
Renaissance, II, 22, 38, SOnS5, 71n9
Representation, I, 3, 5- 9, 13, 30, 32, 40-41, 46, 48, 69, 77, 86, 101, 113, 122,
132, 139
autonomyauthenticity of, 12-13, 21,
32-33, 37;69-70, 77, 99, 101, 122,
figural, 22, 122
ideology of, 11, 26-27, 32, 96n63, 101,
122


interior, 40-50, 70--71
physio logical site of, SO, 69, 77, 138
"progress" of, 3-4, 10, 23, 26, 30, 110,
126, 132
as "property," 39, 69, 94
three-dimensional, 127n45 (see also
Distance, perception of; Space)
two-dimensional, 34. 46
Reproduction, industrial, 12-13, 20--21,
127,132
mechanical, 2, 12-13, 17, 99, 132
Res cogitans, res extensa, 46
Resemblance, 37-38, 42, 74-75
Ricoeur, Paul, 48n52
Riegl, Alois, 22n30, 82, 95
Riemann, Georg, 126
Rights of man, 11
Rimbaud, Arthur, 93
Roget, Peter Mark, 106, 109
Romanticism, 9, 59, 142, 143
Rorty, Richard, 43, 55
Ruskin, John, 66, 94-95, 138
Saint-Simon, Claude-Henri de, 114-116
Sanre,]ean-Paul, 79n31
Saunderson, Nicholas, 59-60
Scenography, 52, 53n63, 112-113, 125126. See also Theater, Italian
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm von, 98-99,
100n7, 142
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 14, 70--71, 74-85,
92, 138
Science, 9, 26, 29, 106, 149
classical, 34nl3, 48n51
eighteenth-century, 51, 56, 63-64, 66,
74, 93, 98, 129-131
nineteenth-century, 8-9, 14, 15-16,
17n22, 59, 73- 74, 76, 89, 93, 95,
98n2, 102- 112, 118-122, 133, 141142, 147, 148
Sensation, 14, 24, 41-42, 48, 55, 73, 74,
91-93, 96, 102-104, 120n37, 122,
external, 41, 72, 92, 145, 146
Internal, 24, 41, 72, 92, 145
multiplicity of, 24, 59, 70--71 , 100, 118,


Sensation (cont.)
nonmimetic, 89, 95-96
separated from signification, 91n56, 96,
145-146
as succession, 98, 113, 120--122
Senses, 19, 57-62, 89, 93, 122-124. See
also To uch; Vision
distinct nerves of, 81-83, 89
separation of, 19, 57- 58, 81, 89, 94,
122-124
specification of, 57-59, 79, 89, 94
Sens intime, 72
Sensorium, 19-20, 23, 48, 112, 146, 149
validates knowledge, 29, 60, 64 (see
also Touch)
Serres, Michel, 46n46, 51
Seurat, Georges
Sunday Afternoon on the Island ofLa
Grande jatte, 126
Sexuality, 39n29, 78, 96, 104n16
Signs, 10, 11-13, 48, 55, 91, 149
aristocratic, 12, 17n22
external, 24
mobility of, 10, II, 17n22, 62, 149
modern, 11-13, 17n22, 128, 149
ninete enth-century, 12-13, 14, 17
Signification, 4, 96. See also
Representation; Sensation; Stimulus
Simmel, Georg, 10, 23, 149
Simon, Gerard, 35nl6
"Simulacrum," 12
Space, 23, 41-42, 59, 62, 92, 118-129
classical, 4, 138n2
o ptically constructed, 59, 62, 119-128,
(see also Perspective)
psychologically constructed, 75
Riemann, 126
urban, 10, 52
Specific nerve energies, theory of, 89, 94,
Spectacle, 17-19,33, 112, 136, ISO
society of the, 2, 17-19
Spectator, 5, 112
Spinoza, Benedict de, 142, 145n17
Spurzheim, Johann Gaspar, 81
Stampfer, Simon Ritter von, 110
Stereoscope, 8, 9, 14, 16, 19, 59, 62,

Index

112n30, 116-126, 129-134
and sense of touch, 19, 62, 122, 127128
Stimulus, 20, 23-24, 83, 93-94, 96, 149
arbitrary relation to sensation, 90--93,
145-146,149
quantification of, 101-102, 124, 142-'
Stroboscope, 110
Subject, 3, 6n2, 10, 14, 69, 92, 100, 137,
ISO
control of, 15, 18, 24, 73, 81, 84-85,92,
104nl7, 112, 145, 148,150
observing, 5, 9, 16, 19, 27, 38, 41, 69,
100, 133
physiology of, 15-17,70,72,76-79,92,
145-146, 148 (see also Observer,
body of)
rationalization of, 3, 9, 14-18, 24, 66,
73,84-85, 92, 95, 129- 131, 145
relation to external world, 4-5, 27,
33n11 , 34, 39, 41-42, 46, 69, 73, 92,
137
transcendental, 27, 41, 77, 79
Subjectivity, 2, 10, 15, 38, 69, 85, 98, 113114, 145, 148, 150
Sublime, 143
Sun, 43, 138-143
as cause of blindness, 107,141
Surrealism, 18n26
Surveillance, 17-18, 112
Symbol,37
Tables, scientific, 17n21, 56, 60, 63
Telegraph, 11 , 93
Telescope, 129, 131n50
Television, I, 4, 18n26
Thaumatrope, 105-106
Theater, Italian, 12, 52. See also
Scenography
Thermodynamics, 138-139, 148. See also
Electromagnetism; Energy
Time, 24, 34, 92, 95n61, 98, 100, 107, 112,
See also Duration
Tools, 8, 129-131
Touch, 19, 59-64, 122-124
and vision, 57, 60
Turner,. M. W., 138-143,146, 149

Index

The Angel Standing in the Sun, 143,

Ught and Color (Goethe's Theory), 139,
Urbanism, 11, 19, 112
Utilitarianism, eighteenth-century, 131
Vanimo, Gianni, 10

Velasquez, Diego de
Ins Meninas, 41
Verisimilitude, 26, 32n9, 86, 110, 122-124,
132. See also Representation,
ideology of
Vermeer, jan, 43-47
The Astronomer, 44, 46
The Geographer; 45, 46
Viewpoint, 50-52, 59, 96, 112-113, 128
ichnographic, 51-52, 95-96
multiple, 20, SO, 118
singular, 48-51,95-96, 113, 136, 137
Vision, 1-7, 17-19,24,26-27,70, 74nl6,
126, 136, 139, 141, 142, 147,
149-150. See also Eye; Viewpoint
autonomy of, 14, 48, 57-58, 62, 75-76,
94-95. 98, 141-143, 150
binocular, 16,48-50,53, 118-122, 133,
142nl2, 148
classical model of, 3, 4, 19, 24, 27, 35,
69-70
cone of, 43, 51-53, 138
decorporealized, 16, 19, 39, 43, 47
"innocent," 66, 95-96
knowledge of, 7, 14, 16-17,33.70-71,
monocular, 39, 48-50, 52-53, 127
"natural," 26, 124
"necessary conditions of," 68-69, 9091
normative, 4, 5, 11n11, 16-17,95
objective, 98, 102-104, 137-138
parallax in, 119-121
peripheral, 16, 104
Renaissance model of, 3, 4, 38
subjective, 9, 14, 16, 19, 69,85-86,91,
97, 104, 112, 118, 139. 141


temporaliry of, 97-98, 104, 141, 146147
Visuality, abstraction of, 2-3, 9, 14, 19, 24,
41, 88, 113, 141, 147, 150
"Northern," 34-36
privileging of, 11, 38, 48n53, 55-56, 57,
95. 141
specialization of, 18, 57, 59
structuring of knowledge by, 11, 17-19,
48n53, 57, 59, 91-92, 98, 112116, 118-119, 127-128, 133-138,
148-150
Western tradition of, 1-4, 17-19,2526, 31, 57
Warburg School, 21
Weber, Ernst, 101, 14Sn16
Weber, Max, I 0
Weber's Law. See Fechner's Law
Wheatstone, Sir Charles, 118, 119-120,
Wheelock, Arthur K., 32n9
White, Hayden, 129n48
Whitehead, Alfred North, 72
Wolfflin, Heinrich, 22n30
Worringer, Wilhelm, 8 Jn40
Wundt, Wilhe lm, 8Sn46, 101, 142
Zootrope, 100, lll, ll3

Art and Technology:
The Panacea That Failed
JACK BURNHAM

from: The Myths of Information
ed. Kathleen Woodward
Coda Press, 1980

r

ay's science has spawned a wealth of technical gadgetry, while on
the other hand, modern visual artists have been notoriously
unsuccessful in utilizing much of it in the making of socially
acceptable art. Why should it be so? Some forms of technology seem to
lend themselves to art which has gained museum status, yet even with
the aid of millions of dollars in grants and private donations (plus the
assistance of some of the biggest names in contemporary American art,
e.g., Rauschenberg, Oldenburg, Warhol, Kaprow, Lichtenstein, Morris,
and Smith), the results have fared from mediocre to disastrous when
artists have tried to use what has euphemistically been referred to as the
electronic technology of "postindustrial culture."
Precisely what succeeds in the context of art and what fails? Simple
mechanical devices based on balanced catenary links such as Alexander
Calder's mobiles or George Rickey's weighted blades seem to be the only
kinetic sculpture fully accepted by the art world. In terms of luminous
sculpture (which saw a dazzling revival in the 1960s), only Dan Flavin's
unexotic fluorescent fixtures have gained permanent status in museum
collections. Certain hand-manipulated objects such as the water boxes of
Hans Haacke, the optical reliefs of Jesus Soto, and the Signals of the
Greek Takis have some artistic validity. Curiously enough, the only
machine-driven or electrically powered art that has maintained its status
through the 1970s are the fantastic robots and constructions of the Swiss

Jean Tinguely, which an? programmed in many instances to break down
or malfunction. It must be remembered that during the 1920s Francis
Picabia, Max Ernst, Man Ray, Marcel Duchamp, and Tristan Tzara joined
in the systematic subversion of the machine as an artistic force. Moreover,
one wonders if the Constructivist-Dadaist Congress in Weimar in 1922,
was really an accident of accommodation as some of the participants later
insisted, or if there was subconscious and interior motivation to the
juxtaposition of Dada's brand of chaotic destruction with the mechanistic
ideology of Constructivism. Why should the only successful art in the
realm of twentieth-century technology deal with the absurdity and
fallibility of the machine? And why should electrical and electronic visual
art prove to be such a dismal failure?
At its ideological core, advanced technology has always maintained
some of the chimerical effect that the perpetual motion machine had
before the twentieth century; we are led to believe in its eternal stability,
omnipotence, and its ability to perpetuate human enlightenment. We
have been seduced into not doubting technology's efficacy because of its
palpable short-term advantages. Yet why have the majority of artists
spurned advanced technology, and why have others so bungled its use in
producing new art forms? Is it possible that the schism between art and
sophisticated technology is far deeper than we suspect, that, in fact, these
differences may lie embedded in the neural programs of artists' and
scientists' minds? Or are there teleological reasons for this schism,
perhaps based on the theological foundations of the Judaic-Christian
tradition? If so, let us review some of the recent evidence before surmising
the reasons for it.
In Paris the dealer Denise Renee opened an exhibtion entitled "Le
Mouvement" in 1953 with the help of K.G. Pontus Hulten and her
partner Victor Vasarely. Included in "Le Mouvement" were Duchamp,
Soto, Tinguely, Calder, Bury, and Agam. In March of 1961 the first
"International Exhibition of Art and Motion" opened at the Stedelijk
Museum in Amsterdam where it caused a succes de scandale for the
organizers, in part because of the public response and the bitter tensions
which prevailed between the Neo-Dadaists and the kinetic Constructivists. In April of that same year the Australian sculptor Len Lye
mesmerized an audience at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City
with an evening of "Revolving Harmonic" polished rods which created
virtual forms at various speeds. Thus began a propensity for art in motion
and light during the last decade which in 1967 Time magazine was to
caption "The Kinetic Kraze." The rationale behind much of this esthetic
was a simple one; namely, if so much of twentieth-century art was
concerned with the depicted effects of light and movement, then

why not produce art which literally relied on light and movement?
Until the early 1960s museums and galleries had tended to emphasize the historical aspects of light and movement. Technically this
involved simple motor-driven devices, motorized light boxes, and
various static light sources such as neon, incandescent and fluorescent
fixtures. Following the Amsterdam Retrospective and an outstanding
kinetic display at the 1964 Documenta III exhibition in Kassel, West
Germany, the tendency moved towards an escalation of technical means,
with a concurrent emphasis on collaborations between artists and
research and engineering personnel. By the mid-1960s a division had
developed between the earlier "machine art" and what could be defined
as "systems and information technology." The latter includes artists' use
of computer and online display systems, laser and plasma technology,
light and audio-sensor controlled environments, all levels of video
technology r color copy duplicating systems, programmed strobe and
projected light environments using sophisticated consoles, and artificially controlled ecological sites. The definitive boundary line between
the old and new technologies probably came with the New York Museum
of Modern Art's 1968 exhibition "The Machine as Seen at the End of the
Mechanical A g e  '
At this point it might prove beneficial to touch upon five major art
and technology projects with which I have been tangentially or directly
concerned. In some instances financial support or approximate budgets
have been supplied. These are given to provide some yardstick with
which to compare costs relative to standard museum exhibitions. If final
evaluations for most of these projects appear overly negative, it should be
remembered that these also express the general consensus of the art
community and not just my opinion.
. Experiments in Art and Technology
Dr. Billy Kluver, a Bell Telephone Laboratories' scientist specializing in
laser research, had worked with top-level artists all over the world since
the late 1950s when he had been an adviser for K.G. Hulten's kinetic
exhibition in Amsterdam. In 1965, along with John Cage and Robert
Rauschenberg, Kluver began to organize an art and technology extravaganza which became the ill-fated "Nine Evenings: Theater and Engineering," presented at the 69th Regimental Armory in New York City in
October of 1966- Kluver, with the aid of some of the most prestigious
names in American art, gained the support of some thirty patrons and
sponsors amounting to over $100,000. The donated engineering aid was
probably worth at least $150,000.
Each evening of "Nine Evenings" presented one or two uniquely

designed "pieces," including large scale inflatable structures, radiocontrolled dance vehicles, audio-magnified tennis games, infra-red
projected "work tasks" performed in the dark, and complex musical
pieces synthesized from a number of live external sources. On October 15
the theater critic Clive Barnes reported on the first performance of "Nine
Evenings"; his view was more or less typical of the general audience
response, particularly that of other artist spectators:
If the Robert Rauschenberg work, "Open Score," had been a big and glorious
fiasco—the kind of thing people write about in years to come rather than the
next morning—it could have been a kind of little triumph. But in fact it was
such a sad failure, such a limp disaster, more like an indiscretion than an
offense. The level of the technology was such that the performance started 40
minutes late, a 15-minute intermission lasted 35 minutes and even a loud
speaker announcement was so indistinct on the apparently unsound sound
equipment that it became unintelligible. God bless American art, but God
help American science.'
Barnes later pointed out that "Nine Evenings" was not so much an
experiment in theater and engineering as it was an experiment in
sociology, since it would take a particularly perverse audience to sit
through and endure anything so feeble. Later defenders of "Nine
Evenings," such as the critic Douglas Davis, alluded to the overall
complexity and uniqueness of each performer's support system. "There
was, to begin with," Davis has written, "the patchboard system. Each
artist's performance was prewired; all of his equipment could be hooked
up by inserting his particular patchboard. The system included amplifiers, relay decoders, tone-control units, transmitters and receivers; it also
included a 'proportional control' network that made it possible to change
the intensity and volume of both light and sound by moving a flashlight
over sixteen photocells. . . ."* Kluver and his associates insisted that
"Nine Evenings" had been a qualified success, based on the excellent
rapport that developed between some artists and engineers working out
problems on an intimate basis, and indeed, this has become the major
rationale for claiming success for many subsequent art and technology
mergers.
In January of 1967 Kluver and a group of associates published their
first E. A. T. News bulletin as an outgrowth of "Nine Evenings." The public
function of Experiments in Art and Technology Inc. was to act as a service
organization, to make materials, technology, and engineering advice
available to contemporary artists. Because of its governmental and
dive Barnes, "Dance of Something at the Armory," New York Times, 15 Oct. 1966, 
Douglas Davis, Art and the Future: A HistoryProphecy of the Collaboration Between Science,
Technology, and Art (New York: Praeger, 1973), 
2

corporate ties, E. A.T. felt that it was in an ideal position to act as a liaison
between artists and desired industries. Working from a Manhattan loft,
E.A.T. held a number of seminars, lectures, and demonstrations for
interested parties, and produced "Some More Beginnings" at the
Brooklyn Museum in 1968. By 1970 Kluver and key members of E. AT,
had so proselytized on a nation-wide basis that according to their riles
they had upwards of 6,000 members, reportedly half artists and half
engineers. No doubt, E.A.T.'s greatest success was its ability to extract
relatively large sums of money from the National Endowment for the
Arts, the New York Arts Council, large corporations, and various patrons
of the arts. Technology seemed to be the key to loosening all sorts of purse
strings. If business had been the business of the United States in the
1920s, surely in the 1960s the business of the United States was to
acquiesce to the mystique of technology, as epitomized by the use of the
"automated battlefield" and systems analysis during the Vietnam War.
The reputation of E.A.T. was irreparably hurt by its rupture with the
Pepsi-Cola Company when it planned to produce an art and technology
pavillion for Expo 70 at Osaka, Japan. As Calvin Tomkins elaborates in his
brilliant article for The New Yorker, "Onward and Upward with the
Arts," the E.A.T. people, after many delays and financial fiascos in
Osaka, presented Pepsi in April, 1970 with a maintenance contract for
$405,000; the previously proposed sum had been $185,000. * Pepsi pulled
out and E.A.T. gradually lost its image as a corporate mediator. Outside
New York City, artist members of E.A.T. began to grumble that they were
merely statistical fodder for E.A.T.'s grant proposals and that most of
their serious requests to E.A.T. were simply ignored or bypassed with
form letters. Once the word penetrated the art world that E.A.T. was an
"elitist" organization, simply catering to the needs of its own staff and a
few favored big-time artists in the New York area, its nahonal demise was
insured.
. Cybernetic Serendipity
The first large-scale exhibition of "post-machine" art was held at the
Institute of Contemporary Arts in London during the summer of 1968.
Entitled "Cybernetic Serendipity," it was curated by Jasia Reichardt, an
imaginative writer and vital force on the London art scene. Her cataloguebook contains a good layman's account of the historical development of
digital computers, some relevant scientific projects, plus various experiments by artists that utilize feedback in machines. Other exhibits in
"Cybernetic Serendipity" included computer printouts of musical
3

Calvin Tomldns, "Onward and Upward with the Arts," The New Yorker, 3 Oct. 1970,


analysis, computer-designed choreography, and computer generated
texts and poems. But the I.C.A.'s exhibition was produced on a shoestring budget: it did not use on-site computers or terminals and much of
the available equipment was loaned. Moreover, when the exhibition was
shipped to the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington D.C. the following
year, a considerable portion of the contents was destroyed because of
poor packing and handling. Several unpaid electrical engineers spent
months salvaging parts of "Cybernetic Serendipity" for the opening, but
Jasia Reichardt publicly disowned what was shown there.
Software
During the winter of 1969, Karl Katz, the director of the Jewish Museum
in New York City, decided to mount a major exhibition based on
computer technology and chose me to curate what was to become the first
computerized art environment within a museum. "Software" did not
open, however, until September of the following year. When I accepted, I
hardly realized that the project would consume a year and a half of my
life. Problems surfaced at every turn, ranging from dilemmas of conception and budgetary restrictions to malfunctioning of equipment and
possibly even sabotage.
First, in planning the content of "Software," I was faced with an
obvious quandary. At least two-thirds of extant "computer-art" consisted
of computer programs designed to simulate existing art styles. Early on
the use of the digital computer as a generative tool for creating art or
music had been noted by Dr. John R. Pierce of Bell Labs. This was the
case in the work of John Whitney, for example, who in the early 1960s
began to program geometrical computer graphics using LB.M. equipment. Similarly, Michael Noll had created a series of linear variations on
known modernist masterpieces by using a line plotter. And there were
many others: Kenneth Knowlton and Leon Harmon, Charles Csuri and
Harold Cohen, to name only a few. But in spite of a wealth of official
financial aid during the 1960s and early 1970s, most computer artists
became profoundly disillusioned with the creative potential of tools. As
Michael Noll admitted as early as 1970, "The computer has only been
used to copy aesthetic effects easily obtained with the use of conventional
media, although the computer does its work with phenomenal speed and
eliminated considerable drudgery. The use of computers in the arts has
yet to produce anything approaching entirely new aesthetic experience." 4 And in fact, except for the magazine, Leonardo, edited by the exaeronautics engineer Frank Malina, the art world has been consistently
unanimous in its refusal to recognize or in any way support computer"Davis, 

based art. With all this in mind, I decided with "Software" to forget about
"art" as such and to concentrate on producing an exhibition that was
educational, viewer interactive, and open to showing information
processing in all its forms.
Sponsored by the American Motors Corporation through the agency
of Ruder & Finn Fine Arts, a public relations firm, "Software's" initial
budget was $60,000, not a princely sum, we were to learn, for an
exhibition which expected to house four computers. The Jewish Museum
expected substantial help from some of the smaller computer firms,
companies specializing in software design, and various university
departments that relied heavily on computer technology. I.B.M., we
were told, was willing to pick up the tab for all of the exhibition's
hardware and software. But the Museum and American Motors correctly
perceived that "Software" would all too readily become a prime-time
commercial for I.B.M, and thus the offer was rejected. However, two
months before the opening of "Software"—with eight major computerized exhibits—we decided that an extra $15,000 was an absolute necessity
to sustain the show through a two-month exhibition period. American
Motors generously added this money to our budget of $60,000. And
without the donated support of various corporations such as Digital
Equipment Corporation, 3M Company, Interdata, Mohawk Data Systems, two members of the Smithsonian Institution design staff, and
sundry individuals in the computer field, it is doubtful that "Software"
could have been mounted for less than $25,000. Yet even after our major
computer, the PDP-8, had been reprogrammed a second time, it took
several D.E.C. engineers six weeks to make both "Labyrinth" (the
interactive catalogue) and related exhibits operational. The computer's
failure to function was a mystery to everyone and a source of embarrassment to D.E.C.
This was not the only operational difficulty. The day before "Software" opened, the exhibit which one encountered upon entering the
show's space—a darkened pentagon of five film loops which showed
artists working or explaining their conception of "Software"—was
destroyed by two of the filmmakers themselves. Involved in a dispute
over titling and finances with the producer of the films, they cut the five
films to pieces; it took three weeks to resolve these problems and make
copies from the master prints. And the night before "Software" opened, a
janitor sweeping the floors of the Museum short-circuited the entire
program of the PDP-8 by breaking some wires in a terminal stand with a
push broom—or at least that was the official story released by the Jewish
Museum.
The fact that "Software" opened without its film and minus the use
of its central computer gave gleeful satisfaction to some members of the

New York art press. The reasons for this animosity may stem from the
ever-growing and disproportionate influence that technology exerts on
our cultural values. As a result of training and personality, many art
critics consider themselves "humanists" with strong feelings concerning
the encroachments of technology on nature and cultural traditions. A few
have successfully advocated what might be termed "Pop Technology,"
e.g., cybernetic light towers, video banks, and electronic sensoriums, but
most critics instinctively realize that it would damage their art world
credibility if they became serious advocates of hard technology as an
esthetic life-style. With the rash of "Tek-Art" adventures during the
1960s, substantial numbers of artists and critics feared that electronics
might soon overwhelm the prestige of the traditional art media as found
in painting and sculpture. At the rime, the spectre of an engineercontrolled art world seemed a bit too imminent for comfort. Hence, the
reviews for "Software" were decidedly mixed, containing both strong
praise and condemnation.
But on the whole, Talmudic scholars and rabbis situated on the top
floor of the Jewish Museum were heard to mutter darkly as to the
inappropriateness of exhibiting "Software" in a museum mainly devoted
to Judaica and Jewish studies. The director of the museum, Karl Katz, lost
his job a month after "Software" was disassembled. And the New York
Trade Commission gave American Motors a special award in 1971 for
sponsoring the most ambitious and interesting cultural failure of the year
in New York City, an mixed blessing which American Motors, nevertheless accepted with gratitude.
IV. The Center for Advanced Visual Studies
One of the major attempts to wed art and technology in the United States
during the last decade began formally in January 1968 with the opening of
The Center for Advanced Visual Studies at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Its founder was the head of the Visual Design Department at
M.I.T., Professor Gyorgy Kepes, who in the early 1940s had headed the
photography department at the Chicago Bauhaus under Laszlo MoholyNagy. Invited to M.LT. in 1946 to organize the design program for
student architects and engineers, Kepes created several important light
murals during the 1950s and taught a seminar in 1957 on kinetic art,
considerably before kineticism became fashionable in the United States.
Possessing formidable connections within the scientific and academic
world, he began plans for the Center in 1965. The Center for Advanced
Visual Studies was to be the fulfillment of everything his mentor,
Moholy-Nagy, had written about in his seminal Vision in Motion during
the Dessau Bauhaus period. In 1967 M.LT. renovated its old bookstore on

Massachusetts Avenue in Cambridge according to Kepes' plans. Essentially this consisted of five large, first floor studio areas, a large public
work space in the basement, a small woodworking shop, plus a lavishly
equipped photography darkroom.
In 1968 the German artist Otto Piene, the Greek sculptor Takis,
Harold Tovish, Ted Kraynik, Wen-Ying Tsai, and I were invited to join
the Center as its first fellows. Kepes' master plan for the Center was to
produce a sophisticated environment where artists with a technological
bent could do their own art and collaborate on large-scale group projects.
In Art and the Future, Douglas Davis draws a fairly sympathetic portrait of
Kepes' hopes and the early progress of the Center, Davis comments that
the "Center's early years were lean ones financially, and that Kepes was
kept from fulfilling his hopes in detail." 5 After a year at the Center my
perception was at considerable variance with what Douglas Davis saw or
believed.
Given the state of the American art world, Kepes initially had
generous financial support, with M.LT. and a half a dozen foundations
backing him. But during the past few years support for the Center has
dwindled as it has failed to produce writings, art works, or urban projects
of any significance. Much of this is not the fault of the present director,
Otto Piene, who has struggled to keep the Center alive. I would lay the
blame in two directions: the rapid decline of technological art as one of the
pet ideals of the avant garde, and the Center's lack of any concrete
philosophy beyond the exploitation of available technologies. All too
often artists expect their rather feeble art ideas to be rescued with the aid
of exotic electronics.
Actually, except for those areas of scientific research that produced
stunning photographs, such as holography, electron microscopy, and
aspects of optical physics, Kepes had a strange aversion to direct
involvement with sophisticated technology, particularly anything to do
with the computer sciences. Due to the fact that the Center had been
publicized, by virtue of its relation to M.LT., as a technological nirvana for
the artist, 1 found the situation mystifying. Slowly it began to dawn on me
that the Center's underlying purpose was not primarily to do visual
research or to make art, but to produce lavishly illustrated catalogues and
anthologies that would impress foundations.
One should remember that in 1969 the Vietnam War and studentfaculty protests were at their height. Speculation abounded that the
Center was M.LT.'s gesture towards the humanities, perhaps a means of
focusing attention away from the presence of so many Navy and Air Force
contracts. Certainly the Center never really had any concrete program,
'Davis, 

outside of fulfilling the director's vague dreams of creating urban
spectaculars. During my first month and a half we met twice weekly to
discuss Kepes' ambitions for erecting a colossal light tower in the middle
of Boston Harbor. Somehow the conversations and exchange of ideas
remained maddeningly vague, I began to ask specfic questions:
Did the Center have funds for such a project or any idea of costs? No.
Given that the Boston Harbor was directly in the flight patterns of
Logan Airport, had the Center checked on the feasibility of the project
with the local Civil Aeronautics Board, or with the Boston Harbor
Authority? No,
Did they understand the problems of laying underwater electrical
conduit or the costs? No.
What was the civic purpose of the light monument? No one really
knew.
V. Art and Technology
Of all the art and technology projects instigated during the 1960s, Maurice
Tuchman's five-year symbiosis at the Los Angeles County Museum
(1967—71) was the most ambitious and perhaps the most revealing. In
1 visited the Los Angeles County Museum at the invitation of
Tuchman, the Museum's Curator of Modern Art, in the capacity of
consultant. From the start there was something grossly immodest about
"Art & Technology" or "A & T" as the Museum called it. Tuchman
managed to induce thirty-seven corporations in the Southern California
area to contribute financial and technical support to resident artists. After
three years of selection and various labyrinthine transactions which are
documented in the "A & T" catalogue, the Museum came up with
twenty-two artists who were paired to work with specific corporations.
Out of these twenty-two artists, sixteen finally produced usable pieces or
environments of the exhibition. Originally Tuchman proposed that the
Museum contribute $70,000 towards supporting "A & T," while corporations, he felt, would contribute $140,000 in cash donations. By the
Museum's own reckoning, its final budget was $140,000 for the expenses
of "A & T," including three months of operating expenses. In terms of
nonmonetary contributions by corporations, including materials, technical assistance, and the use of working facilities, 1 suspect the total outlay
for "A & T" was between $500,000 and $1,000,000, If "Art & Technology"
had been a critical success, or if its extravagance had not been so attacked
by critics, quite likely the published budget would have been considerably higher,
By drawing up contracts for artists and supporting corporations,

Tuchman made certain that there would be no abrupt pull-outs,
inadequate technical assistance, or failures to furnish length of exhibition
maintenance for artists' projects. In retrospect, the technical support for
Los Angeles' "A & T" exhibition was probably the most thorough and
proficient ever supplied for an exhibition of its kind. And yet the length
and legal binding character of "A & T's" contract was a facet of the project
which critics attacked with vigor. Critics saw it as a covenant between two
capitalist organizations (e.g., the museum and each of its corporate
benefactors), in collusion with or against all the artists involved. Even
Tuchman in the catalogue intimated that most of the artists in the show
would not have participated by 1971, the year "A & T" finally opened,
primarily because much of the art world believed by then that there was
or is a nefarious connection between advanced technology and the
architects of late capitalism. In the press "Art & Technology" was
decimated, and not altogether for unsound reasons.
In a review of "Art and Technology" for Art forum, I tried to place the
exhibition in an historical perspective that would make the responses of
the art world more discernible:
No doubt "humanist" art critics are going to pan A it T as another
marriage of convenience with industry that fails to measure up to Henry
Geldzahler's exalted view of the last 30 years. However, like Dr. Johnson's
remarks on the virtues of singing dogs, defending A & T as the "best
exhibition of its kind" is also questionable. In any case, due to the particular
sociopolitical malaise that has gradually engulfed the United States, this
show probably will be the last technological attempt for a while. If presented
five years ago, A & T would have been difficult to refute as an important
event, posing some hard questions about the future of art. Given the effects
of a Republican recession, the role of large industry as an intransigent
beneficiary of an even more intractable federal government, and the fatal
environmental effects of most of our technologies, few people are going to be
seduced by three months of industry-sponsored art—no matter how
laudable the initial motivation. Certainly painting and sculpture do nothing
to alleviate these conditions, but at least they are less exasperating since they
avoid unpleasant juxtapositions.*
fc

Jack Burnham, "Corporate Art," Artforum, Oct. 1971, 
Artforum along with a piece by Max Kozloff under the general heading: "The 'Art and
Technology' Exhibition at the Los Angeles County Museum (Two Views)." What was
interesting about this review was that both the Los Angeles County Museum and Artforum
had asked me to write it—the former, I thought, because they trusted my objectivity, and
certainly there was much of a critical nature in the 5,000 words that 1 wrote. But unknown to
me, John Coplans, then Managing Editor of Artforum, sent out his most trusted critic. Max
Kozloff's piece, "The Multimillion Dollar Art Boondoggle," Artforum. Oct. 1971, 
probably the most vicious, inflammatory, and irrational attack ever written on the art and
technology phenomenon. It posed the Museum, Tuchman, and most of the artists
connected with "A & T" as lackeys of a killer government, insane for new capitalist

One might look again at the large corporations supporting technological art and the artists receiving their sponsorship and conclude that
both were guilty of some degree of naivete, but hardly collusion for
political purposes. While E.A.T. and other art groups held out the boon of
"new discoveries" to corporations funding them, most companies were
cynical and wise enough to realize that the research abilities of nearly all
artists are nil. What companies could expect is a limited amount of good
press for appearing "forward looking." To be sure, sociologists and
several conceptual artists such as Victor Bur gin and Hans Haacke have
shown that pervasive philanthropy and museum-controlled " taste making" do exert long term political control over the artistic tastes of the
public. But given the costs and popular failure of technological art, it
would appear an enormously inefficient means of swaying the masses,
much less a means of promoting Technocracy as a successor to Capitalism.
In retrospect one could divide the artists participating into three
categories: the tech no-artists such as Robert Whitman, Rockne Krebs,
Newton Harrison, and Boyd Mefferd who were esthetically allied with
the light and kinetic movement; New York "name" artists such as Claes
Oldenburg, Roy Lichtenstein, Richard Serra, Tony Smith, Andy Warhol,
and Robert Rauschenberg who were only tangentially connected with art
and technology; and finally the oddballs such as James Lee Byars, Ron
Kitaj, and Oyvind Falstrom who provided the show's element of
serendipity. The "name" artists tended to do enlarged or elaborate
variations of their standard work or to cynically build into their projects
hints about the utter futility of technology as a humanistic endeavor. Yet,
as I stated in my review, by its nature art depends upon social compliance
and cooperation; every successful artist places his or herself in the hands
of the financial establishment; "Whether out of political conviction or
paranoia, elements of the Art World tend to see latent fascist esthetics in
any liaison with giant industries; it is permissible to have your fabrication
done by a local sheet-metal shop, but not by Hewlett-Packard." 7
The examples given so far—"Experiments in Art and Technology,"
"Cybernetic Serendipity," "Software," The Center for Advanced Visual
Studies, and "Art and Technology"—are a representative cross-section
of major art projects concerned with advanced "postindustrial" technology during the past ten years. Have they failed as art because of technical
or esthetic incompetency, or because they represent some fundamental
conquests in South East Asia. Kozloff depicted half of the artists involved as "fledgjing
technocrats, acting out mad science fiction fantasies"; the more sophisticated artists he
envisioned as cynical opportunists.
T
Bumham, "Corporate Art," 

dissimilarity as systems of human semiosis? Although it is clear that
technical incompetency is partially to blame, I would suspect the latter is a
more fundamental explanation. My experiences with semiology and
iconography lead me to believe that the enormous vitality and will-tochange behind Western art is in a sense an illusion, just as technology
harbors its own illusionary impulses. Only within the past ten years have
we begun to accept the possibility that technological solutions are not
universal panaceas. Gradually but surely, much of it in unspoken terms,
we are beginning to accept evidences that scientific research and
technological invention have their boundaries. Such a speculation would
have been nearly unthinkable fifteen years ago when scientific grants
were plentiful and the avant garde was the key to artistic success. Perhaps
technology is only a matter of man-made or artificial negentropy which,
because of its enormous productive capacity and ability to aggrandize
perception into convenient and coherent packages of "information," we
perceive as invincible, life-stabilizing, all-meaningful, and omnipotent.
Since the scientific revolution, art has become a protected cultural
sanctuary; as empiricism has gradually dominated everyday cultural
values and academic standards, art has been transformed into a sort of
necessary way-station for the expression of anti-social sentiments. It
liberates the human spirit by its inability or reluctance to become acutely
self-analytical, while at the same time art remains implicitly crihcal of
everything around itself. One might conjecture that art remains a knifeedge or balancing fulcrum for the human psyche. By that 1 mean it
encompasses all aspects of the psyche equally; mythic fantasy, technological skill, esthetic idealism, manual craftsmanship, a variety of contents,
but most importantly an internal semiotic consistency which prevents it
from becoming absorbed by other disciplines, no matter how powerful or
persuasive. If there is a teleological function to art, quite likely it is to lead
us back to our psychological origins, to exhaust our material illusions by
forcing us to understand the reality of mythic experience, for myths are
merely the mental constructs we devise for our perception of the world,
having particular properties isomorphic with the physical world. Yet
increasingly we sense the fragility of art, the fact that modern rationalism
tends to denude it of its most precious characteristic, its "believability."
In 1968, my book Beyond Modem Sculpture was published. What made
the book controversial was the prediction that inert art objects would
eventually exhaust themselves as a means of cultural expression (that is,
lose their powers of contemplative evocation for human beings). I
suggested that the art world was rapidly moving from "object" orientation towards a "systems" orientation in its perception of mundane
reality. The book ended with a prophecy:

The stabilized dynamic system will become not only a symbol of life but
literally life in the artist's hands and the dominant medium of further
aesthetic ventures. . . . As the Cybernetic Art of this generation grows more
intelligent and sensitive, the Greek obsession with "living" sculpture will
take on an undreamed reality.
The physical beauty which separates the sculptor from the results of his
endeavors may well disappear altogether.8
In a sense Beyond Modern Sculpture validated itself in terms of some
subsequent art; where it erred gravely is in its tendency to anthropomorphize the goals of technology. As with Norbert Wiener's comparison
of the ancient Jewish myth of the man-made Golem with cybernetic
technology, I envisioned the resolution of art and technology in the
creation of life itself. Yet, in a most ironic fashion, something other than
that has taken place. Presently and for the near future the science of
artificial intelligence has produced nothing approaching life-like cognition, but merely pale imitations of it. The cybernetic art of the 1960s and
is considered today little more than a trivial fiasco. Nevertheless,
avant garde art during the past ten years has, in part, rejected inert objects
for the "living" presence of artists, and by that I am referring to
Conceptual Art, Performance Art, and Video Art. In the case of such
artists as Chris Burden, Joseph Beuys, Christian Boltanski, James Lee
Byars, and Ben Vautier, art and life activities have become deliberately
fused, so that the artist's output is, in the largest sense, life-style. During
his last years, Marcel Duchamp often insisted that art, after all, was only
the process of "making." Thus, in a literal way, art objects are merely
materials, the semiotic residue of the artist's activities. What we are
seeing when we view art is a fusion of cognition and gesture; as the
historical semiotic of art evolves, this becomes increasingly apparent.
Gradually the art object destabilizes, imploding upon itself. What is left is
a series of partitioned fragments of the entire art-making process.
In the long run, technology may, like art, be a form of cognitive bootstrapping, an illusionary form of conquest over the forces of Nature. Both
are vaguely deceptive in that they hold out the possibility of human
transcendence, yet they only lead us back to a point where we can understand how we are dominated by our own perceptual illusions. In
technology the sense of mastery, manipulation, and "otherness" is a
more implicit assumption than it is in art. The ritual-making aspects of art
do not sever man so effectively from his natural origins. Ultimately,
perhaps, the very weakness of art as a cultural force—its conceptual
confusion and lack of utilitarian value—gives it its strength.
"Jack Burnham, Beyond Modern Sculpture: The Effects of Science and Technology on The
Sculpture of This Century (New York: George Braziller, Inc., 1968), 

Any attempt to explain why art and the electronic technologies are
mutually exclusive can only be conjecture. Possibly, though, the reasons
for this schism are metaphysical and not technical. At its foundations art
may be a cognitive discipline or exercise, one that steers us towards the
most primitive regions of the human brain. Physically, the brain is a jellylike gray mass composed of billions of neurons sending and receiving
billions of weak electrical signals per second. Providing that art is
primarily a form of self-understanding re-cognition), it would seem likely
that the principles behind the historical evolution of art contain an
exclusion principle. By that I mean a principle which does not allow the
esthetic-cognitive functions of the brain to accept an electronic technology as an extension of inanimate objects. In a sense a certain rapport or
similarity exists between the brain and electronic technology, although
analogies between the two at this time are very gross. Traditionally the
esthetic aura or charisma of art has existed within a Pygmalion-like
paradox: art "lives" although it remains consecrated in dead, inanimate
materials. To challenge that paradoxical state may very well jeopardize
the mythic consistency of Western art.
When one speaks of the "mythic consistency of Western art" many
alternate possibilities come to mind. What I mean by that is Western art's
semiological consistency, that fabric of "believability" in contemporary
thought which has possibly been best defined in Roland Barthes'
illuminating essay, "Myth Today." Barthes suggests, and I feel correctly
so, that virtually everything is subject to mythic interpretation, hence the
limits of myth are essentially formal, not substantial.9 Does such a broad
generalization define myth out of existence? Or does it suggest that the
efficacy of mythic thought is far more culturally pervasive than our
intellectual conventions allow? Barthes, of course, has been a strong
advocate of the second position. For him myth becomes in a sense
"background," the naturalization and depoliticization of everyday speech.
This suffices, as with Barthes' examples, to explain the subtleties of
patriotic posters, dress codes, or bourgeois rhetoric, yet it allows us
insufficient insight into the dynamic vicissitudes of equally if not more
complex phenomena such as art history.
Here one might suspect that the level of historical discourse (that
carried on in works of art by artists and not scholarly analysis) is
essentially anagogic, having to do with the unresolved purpose of JudaicChristian culture at the highest levels. In such a case, the linguistic
conventions of signified, signifier, sign, and referent revert back to their
theological forms of Father, Son, Holy Ghost, and last but not least, Man
himself. The mythic consistency of the Judaic-Christian tradition is
'Roland Barthes, Mythologies, trans. Annette Lavers (New York: Hill and Wang, 1972).

premised on a somewhat multiple assumption: namely, man cognizes by
virtue of perceiving dichotomies, he acts triadically through the agency of
signs, but he only comes to know himself by dissolving thought and
action in the recognition of unity. The theological term "anagogic" also
refers to the transformation of drives from the unconscious into constructive ideation, which is just about as succinct a definition of Western art as
one could hope for.
As such, Western art leads a double existence. It operates as an
unveiled and exoteric activity, taught pervasively in schools (usually
badly) and subject to the most commercial exploitation. Yet it contradicts
Barthes' everyday mythic invisibility because art by its very paradoxical
nature (its near perfect resistance to economic, psychological, or sociological interpretation), openly signifies an apparent mystery concerning
the fusion of spirit and matter. So at the highest level, secrecy and a code
of concealment are imperative for its cultural survival.
Dialectically art moves in Western culture towards the disclosure of
the human psyche, which 1 would interpret as the life force unhindered
by ego and self-consciousness. Even this is accomplished paradoxically in
that art appears to be constantly moving away from clarity and resolution,
and towards chaos and materialism. Technology's mythic consistency is
no less subtle, because it springs from the accrued conviction of the
intellect's invincibility. In a sense it resembles the other side of the human
personality: lacking the psychic acceptance of the artist, it places its raison
d'etre in empiricism, which tends to lead it towards its worst enemies,
paradox and meaninglessness. Nevertheless, while art and technology
show signs of mutual exclusiveness, at the level of anagogic significance
they may actually be completely tautological.

The Craft of Thought
Meditation, rhetoric, and the making of images,
400±1200

MARY CARRUTHERS
New York University

published by the press syndicate of the university of cambridge
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1RP, United Kingdom
cambridge university press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK www.cup.cam.ac.uk
West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011±4211, USA www.cup.org
Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia
Ruiz de AlarcoÂn 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain
# Cambridge University Press, 1998
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions of
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 1998
First paperback edition 2000
Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge
Typeset in Garamond 1113pt [ c e ]
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 0 521 58232 6 hardback
ISBN 0 521 79541 9 paperback

Contents

List of illustrations
List of abbreviations
Acknowledgments
Introduction

page x
xiv
xv
1

1

Collective memory and memoria rerum
An architecture for thinking
Memoria rerum, remembering things

7
7

2

``Remember Heaven'': the aesthetics of mneme


3

Cognitive images, meditation, and ornament

4

Dream vision, picture, and ``the mystery of the bed chamber'' 171

5

``The place of the Tabernacle''



Notes
Bibliography
Index


ix

Illustrations

color plates
Between pages 142 and 143
1 ``Mappamundi,'' from the Beatus of Saint-Sever. Paris,
BibliotheÁque Nationale, MS lat. 8878, ff. 45v±46. Photo:
BibliotheÁque Nationale de France.
2 The Heavenly City, from the Beatus of Saint-Sever. Paris, BibliotheÁque Nationale, MS lat. 8878, ff. 207v±208. Photo:
BibliotheÁque Nationale de France.
3 The Heavenly City, from the Facundus Beatus. Madrid, Biblioteca Nacional, MS Vitrina 14±2, f. 253v. Photo: Biblioteca
Nacional.
4 The opening of the sixth seal of the Book of the Lamb. Paris,
BibliotheÁque Nationale, MS lat. 8878, f. 116. Photo: BibliotheÁque
Nationale de France.
black and white plates
Between pages 142 and 143
5 Aratus, Phainomena. The heavenly circles and the constellations
of the northern sky. Boulogne-sur-Mer, BibliotheÁque municipale,
MS 188, f.20. Photo: Boulogne-sur-Mer, BibliotheÁque municipale.
6 Isidore of Seville, De natura rerum: constellations. Laon,
BibliotheÁque municipale, MS 422, ff. 27v±28. Photo: Laon,
BibliotheÁque municipale.
7 ``The Mill'': capital in the south aisle of the basilica of Sainte
Madeleine, VeÂzelay (Yonne). Photo: M. Carruthers.
x

List of illustrations
8 ``Prudentius.'' Cambridge, Corpus Christi College MS 23, f. 40.
Photo: the Parker Library, reproduced with permission of the
Master and Fellows of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.
9 The sixth angel pours out his bowl upon the river Euphrates
(Rev. 16:12), from the Morgan Beatus. New York, Pierpont
Morgan Library, MS M. 644, f. 190v. Photo: the Pierpont Morgan
Library, New York.
A punctuated page from The Book of Kells. Dublin, Trinity
College, MS 58, f. 278. Photo reproduced by permission of the
Board of Trinity College Dublin.
A limasson (snail) bording (sparring) with a knight in a lower
border of the Rutland Psalter. London, British Library, MS
Addtl. 62925, f. 48. Photo: the British Library.
A monster plays with severed limbs in a border of the Rutland
Psalter. London, British Library, MS Addtl. 62925, f. 83v. Photo:
the British Library.
A hunting dog (lymer) tracks a hidden rabbit in a border of the
Rutland Psalter. London, British Library, MS Addtl. 62925,
f. 57v. Photo: the British Library.
A chain of pretzel and biscuit breads surrounds the margin of a
prayer; from the Hours of Catherine of Cleves. New York,
Pierpont Morgan Library, MS M. 917, 
Morgan Library.
Cubiculum M, in the Villa of Fannius Synestor, Boscoreale;
Roman, 40±30 BC. New York, the Metropolitan Museum of Art,
Rogers Fund, 1903 (03.14.13). Photo: the Metropolitan Museum
of Art.
A cross-carpet page initiating the Gospel of Luke, from the
Lindisfarne Gospels. London, British Library, MS Cotton Nero
D.IV, f. 138v. Photo: the British Library.
Wall painting, Panel II, from Cubiculum M in the Villa of
Fannius Synestor, Boscoreale. New York, the Metropolitan
Museum of Art, Rogers Fund, 1903 (03.14.13). Photo: the
Metropolitan Museum of Art.
A picture of Hell, f. 255 of Hortus deliciarum. After R. Green,
Hortus deliciarum.
Hell and Hell's Mouth, from the Arroyo Beatus. Paris,
BibliotheÁque Nationale, MS nouv. acq. lat. 2290, f. 160. Photo:
BibliotheÁque Nationale de France.
xi

List of illustrations
Theodulph's church at Germigny-des-PreÂs (Loire): mosaic of the
Ark of the Covenant together with two guardian cherubim.
Photo: M. Carruthers.
Gunzo in his dream sees Saints Peter, Paul, and Stephen measuring the plan of the new church at Cluny. Detail of a manuscript made c. 1180. Paris, BibliotheÁque Nationale, MS lat. 17716,
f. 43. Photo: BibliotheÁque Nationale de France.
``The mandala of Jnanadakini.'' New York, the Metropolitan
Museum of Art. Purchase, Lita Annenberg Hazen Charitable
Trust Gift, 1987 (1987.16). Photo: the Metropolitan Museum of
Art.
``Representatio porticus quasi a fronte videretur.'' English, c.
1160±1175. Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Bodley 494, f. 155v.
Photo: the Bodleian Library, Oxford.
The Tabernacle, from the Codex Amiatinus. Florence, Biblioteca
Medicea Laurenziana, MS Amiatinus 1, ff. IIv-III. Photo: Florence, Biblioteca Medicea Laurenziana, with permission of the
Ministero per i Beni Culturali e Ambientali.
Part of the ambulatory and two apsidal ``rooms'' in the church of
the Cistercian abbey at Pontigny (Yonne). Photo: M. Carruthers.
The western portion of the south aisle at Pontigny, constructed in
the 1140s. Photo: M. Carruthers.
The ambulatory of Suger's rebuilt apse (c. 1140) at St.-Denis.
Photo: M. Carruthers.
The trumeau, Ste.-Marie, Souillac (Lot); middle of the twelfth
century. Photo: James Austin.
The western wall of the church porch of the Cluniac abbey of
Moissac (Tarn-et-Garonne). Photo: James Austin.
Noah building the Ark, from the Hunting®eld Psalter. New
York, Pierpont Morgan Library MS M. 43, f. 8v. Photo: the
Pierpont Morgan Library.
The eastern cloister gallery of the Cistercian monastery of
Fontenay (CoÃte-d'Or). Photo: M. Carruthers.
The church of the Cistercian abbey of Pontigny, from the southeast. Photo: M. Carruthers.

xii

List of illustrations
illustrations in the text
Fig. A Two monstrous ®gures composed of versus
page 141
rapportati, from f. 255v of the twelfth-century Hortus
deliciarum. After R. Green, Hortus deliciarum.
Fig. B A detail of the Plan of Saint Gall, after
W. Braunfels, Monasteries of Western Europe.
Fig. C The route of one liturgical procession performed in
the abbey of Centula-St.-Riquier. After C. Heitz,
``Architecture et liturgie processionnelle.''

xiii

1
Collective memory and memoria rerum

Ut sapiens architectus fundamentum posui: alius
autem superaedi®cat.

St. Paul

AN ARCHITECTURE FOR THINKING
machina memorialis
This study could be thought of as an extended meditation on the
myth that Mnemosyne, ``memory,'' is the mother of all the Muses.
That story places memory at the beginning, as the matrix of invention
for all human arts, of all human making, including the making of
ideas; it memorably encapsulates an assumption that memory and
invention, or what we now call ``creativity,'' if not exactly one, are
the closest thing to it. In order to create, in order to think at all,
human beings require some mental tool or machine, and that
``machine'' lives in the intricate networks of their own memory.
In terms of the ®ve-fold ``parts'' of rhetoric formulated memorably
in antiquity for teaching the subject, The Book of Memory centered
on memoria; this one centers on inventio. The order will seem
backwards, since ``everybody knows'' that the ancients taught Invention, Disposition, Style, Memory, Delivery, in that order. Medieval
scholars took Cicero's early treatise ``On Invention'' (De inventione)
as the First Rhetoric, calling the Rhetorica ad Herennium, then
attributed to Cicero, the Second or New Rhetoric. This latter is the
textbook that describes an art of memory based upon the building
plan of a familiar house, in whose rooms and recesses an orator
should ``place'' images that recall to him the material he intends to
talk about. So in medieval textbook tradition too, Invention precedes
Memory.
Mnemonics, ``arti®cial memories,'' and ``memory tricks'' (as they
7

``Collective memory'' and memoria rerum
were called in the nineteenth century) have been viewed with
skepticism; they were so even in antiquity, and certainly are now.
One early seventeenth-century Chinese student, to whom the Jesuit
missionary Matteo Ricci taught the art of memory as a help in
studying for the onerous examination for the imperial civil service,
®nally complained to a con®dant that the system was itself so
cumbersome to learn that it was easier and took less memory just to
memorize the original material. And surely, his assumption must
have been, the good of an art of memory is to remember things in
order to regurgitate them by rote later on.1
In this matter, as so often, the presentation of a subject in textbooks is misleading about daily practice: it seems to have been at
least as much so to Ricci as to the exasperated student. For the
orator's ``art of memory'' was not in practice designed to let him
reiterate exactly in every detail a composition he had previously
fabricated. For one thing, to sound as though he were reciting from
memory like a parrot was one of the worst faults a Roman orator
could commit. It was also foolish, for if he were to forget his lines or
if (very likely in the debates of the Republican Senate) he were
¯ustered by some unexpected event or attack, he would have nothing
to say. The goal of Roman oratory was to speak eloquently ex
tempore; this was the sign of a master.2
Thus the orator's ``art of memory'' was not an art of recitation and
reiteration but an art of invention, an art that made it possible for a
person to act competently within the ``arena'' of debate (a favorite
commonplace), to respond to interruptions and questions, or to
dilate upon the ideas that momentarily occurred to him, without
becoming hopelessly distracted, or losing his place in the scheme of
his basic speech. That was the elementary good of having an
``arti®cial memory.''
The example given in the Rhetorica ad Herennium, of imagining
the scene of a sick man in his bedroom, to whom a physician,
carrying a ram's testicles on his fourth ®nger, offers a cup, is intended
to recall the chief issues of a case at law, not to enable a word-byword recitation of a previously made up and memorized speech.
Remembering these themes as a readily reconstructable quasi- narrative scene of related ®gures, each of which cues a particular subject in
the case, will help an orator readily to compose his speeches ex
tempore, in response to the actual ¯ow of the court proceedings.
All scholars who study the subject of rhetorical memory remain
8

Machina memorialis
much indebted to Frances Yates. But for all its pioneering strengths,
her work unfortunately does reinforce some common misconceptions about the possible cognitive uses of ``the art of memory,'' and
thus the nature of its in¯uence on the making of images and
``places'' for this purpose. Yates herself believed that the goal of the
art of memory was solely to repeat previously stored material: she
characterized the medieval versions of the ancient art as ``static,''
without movement, imprisoning thought.3 She could not have been
more wrong.
She also found what she called ``the Ciceronian art,'' for all its
fascination, preposterous and unworkable.4 Agreeing, if reluctantly,
with people like Matteo Ricci's Chinese student, she presented
mnemotechnic as becoming ®rst a pious and then an arcane study
after antiquity, valued by Renaissance practitioners precisely because,
even while they made extravagant claims for its practical utility, it
was secret and dif®cult. Yates presented the medieval authors (such
as the Dominican friars Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas) who
linked mnemonic craft to piety as mistaken and misdirected. Preferring the arcane to the mainstream, she ignored the basic pedagogy of
memory in the Middle Ages, ®nding only a few medieval sources for
the sixteenth- and seventeenth-century authors with whom she was
primarily concerned.5
I repeat: the goal of rhetorical mnemotechnical craft was not to
give students a prodigious memory for all the information they
might be asked to repeat in an examination, but to give an orator the
means and wherewithal to invent his material, both beforehand and ±
crucially ± on the spot. Memoria is most usefully thought of as a
compositional art.6 The arts of memory are among the arts of
thinking, especially involved with fostering the qualities we now
revere as ``imagination'' and ``creativity.''
This is not a development that one can trace by analysing the
textbook tradition of rhetoric. As a ``part'' of rhetoric, memoria was
added to the textbook tradition by the Stoics, and its place in the
order was not set for quite some time.7 When it is discussed, authors
pay scant attention to it, repeating a few general precepts. The only
elaborated examples of mnemotechnical schemes are in the Rhetorica
ad Herennium. And yet Cicero also says that the master orator's
memory is fundamental to his craft. This opinion is repeated often,
and classical pedagogy strove to furnish each student's mind with a
solid foundation of memorized material. The technique, though not
9

``Collective memory'' and memoria rerum
the content, was similar in the Jewish schools that produced the
earliest Christian teachers.8
The meditational practice of monasticism is not particularly indebted to the pagan rhetorical practice described in the Rhetorica ad
Herennium. I will make this point at length and often in this study; I
emphasize it now because many scholars have assumed, as Yates did,
that there was ever only one art of memory, ``the'' art of memory. It is
clear, however, that the monks also developed what they called an
``art'' or ``discipline'' of memory. This is different in many respects
from the ``Ciceronian'' one, but because those who developed it had
the same general rhetorical education, the methods used share certain
essentials. There are enough similarities that when the art described in
the Rhetorica ad Herennium was revived in the thirteenth century, it
could be made to seem familiar to late medieval culture. But the
medieval revival of this speci®c art, transmitted and adapted primarily
by the orders of canons and friars, took place fully within the context
of monastic memory craft. That is why it seems to historians now that
the ancient art of the Rhetorica ad Herennium suffered a peculiar seachange, and why its cultural translation seems ®lled with ``mistakes''
when they read descriptions of it from the later Middle Ages.
Monastic memoria, like the Roman art, is a locational memory; it
also cultivates the making of mental images for the mind to work
with as a fundamental procedure of human thinking. Because crafting
memories also involved crafting the images in which those memories
were carried and conducted, the arti®ce of memory was also,
necessarily, an art of making various sorts of pictures: pictures in the
mind, to be sure, but with close, symbiotic relationships to actual
images and actual words that someone had seen or read or heard ± or
smelled or tasted or touched, for all the senses, as we will observe,
were cultivated in the monastic craft of remembering.
invention and ``locational memory''
The relationship of memory to invention and cognition may sound
straightforward; it is not. For the notions of what constitutes ``invention'' have changed signi®cantly from the small-group societies of the
pre-modern West to the rationalist individualism of the nineteenth
century. Most importantly, in antiquity and through the Middle
Ages, invention or ``creative thinking'' received the most detailed
attention in the domain of rhetoric, rather than of psychology or

Invention and ``locational memory''
what we would now call the philosophy of mind. We should not
forget this critical difference from our own intellectual habits.
We tend now to think of rhetoric primarily as persuasion of others,
distinguishing ``rhetoric'' from ``self-expression'' (a distinction now
often built into the syllabi of American college composition courses).
But in western monasticism, the craft of rhetoric became primarily
focussed not on tasks of public persuasion but on tasks of what is
essentially literary invention. It is not true to say (or imply), as
histories of the subject have done, that the monks killed off rhetoric.
They redirected it to forming citizens of the City of God, a
characterization made long ago by Christopher Dawson:
alike in the East and the West, [the Church Fathers] were essentially
Christian rhetoricians who shared the culture and traditions of their
pagan rivals . . . Throughout the Church, rhetoric had recovered [its]
vital relation to social life: in place of the old ecclesia of the Greek
city it had found the new ecclesia of the Christian people.9

The writings of those Church Fathers, each with an excellent
rhetorical education ± Augustine, Jerome, Basil, Cassian, Cassiodorus, and Gregory ± formed an essential part of the basic curriculum
of monasticism.
The Latin word inventio gave rise to two separate words in
modern English. One is our word ``invention,'' meaning the ``creation
of something new'' (or at least different). These creations can be
either ideas or material objects, including of course works of art,
music, and literature. We also speak of people having ``inventive
minds,'' by which we mean that they have many ``creative'' ideas, and
they are generally good at ``making,'' to use the Middle English
synonym of ``composition.''
The other modern English word derived from Latin inventio is
``inventory.'' This word refers to the storage of many diverse
materials, but not to random storage: clothes thrown into the bottom
of a closet cannot be said to be ``inventoried.'' Inventories must have
an order. Inventoried materials are counted and placed in locations
within an overall structure which allows any item to be retrieved
easily and at once. This last requirement also excludes collections
that are too cumbersome or too unparticular to be useful; think
about why it is so daunting to locate one's car in a vast parking lot.
Inventio has the meanings of both these English words, and this
observation points to a fundamental assumption about the nature of

``Collective memory'' and memoria rerum
``creativity'' in classical culture. Having ``inventory'' is a requirement
for ``invention.'' Not only does this statement assume that one cannot
create (``invent'') without a memory store (``inventory'') to invent
from and with, but it also assumes that one's memory-store is
effectively ``inventoried,'' that its matters are in readily-recovered
``locations.'' Some type of locational structure is a prerequisite for
any inventive thinking at all.10
These structures need not bear a direct relationship to the ``art of
memory'' described in the Republican Roman Rhetorica ad Herennium. To limit the study of ``locational memory'' to this one variety
has obscured both the generic concept and the medieval and even
Renaissance developments of memoria. More important than (at least
through the mid-thirteenth century), and in addition to, the precepts
of the Rhetorica ad Herennium, there developed very early on in
Christianity a disciplina or via of inventive meditation based on
memorized locational-inventory structures (deriving from Biblical
sources, but more of that later), which was called by the monks
``memoria spiritalis'' or ``sancta memoria.'' This traditional practice of
meditation also was deeply implicated in the pedagogy of ancient
rhetoric as well as the textual pedagogy of Judaism, making many of
the same assumptions about ``invention'' and how it is to be done
that we ®nd more generally in non-Christian sources. As a consequence, it did not develop in total isolation from the ancient
rhetorical practices of invention and composition. The monastic art
also employed a ``locational memory'' as its foundational schema.
The model of memory as inherently locational, and having a
particular cognitive role to play, is quite distinct from another
philosophical model, equally in¯uential in the West and equally
ancient. This is the idea, known to the Middle Ages primarily
through the works of Aristotle (and hence not in¯uential in the
monastic practice of sancta memoria) that de®nes memories temporally, as being ``of the past.''11 Augustine too had emphasized the
temporal nature of memories in his meditations, in the Confessions
and elsewhere, on how we perceive ``time'' in our minds. The two
traditions are frequently confused, even now, and to help sort out
their differences, it might be useful to pause over the analysis of
prudential memoria by Albertus Magnus, the ®rst medieval philosopher to try seriously to distinguish and reconcile them. Albertus is an
early scholastic ®gure, and wrote some ®fty years after 1200, but his
analysis clearly shows the continuing in¯uence of monastic memoria.

Invention and ``locational memory''
Albertus retained a conviction that a locational model of memory
was essential for purposes of cognition. In his treatise ``On the
Good'' (ca. 1246), when discussing the nature of prudence, he raises
the apparent con¯ict between describing memory as essentially
temporal and describing it as essentially locational. The Rhetorica ad
Herennium states that ``arti®cial memory consists of backgrounds
and images.''12 How can memory consist of ``places'' when Aristotle
says that its essence is temporal?
Albertus responds that ``place'' is required for the mental task of
recollection. While it is true that memory can only be ``of'' matters
that are past, presented to us in ``images,'' the task of remembering
requires that the images so stored be in places. Two very different
questions are being inappropriately confused by the erroneous
observation of a ``con¯ict'' between Aristotle and Cicero concerning
the nature of memory, Albertus implies. The one question, ``What is
memory?'' (answer: ``Memory is stored-up images of past experiences'') is an ontological one, ``What is the content of memories?''13
But the other question, ``What is memory?'' (answer ``Memory
consists of backgrounds and images'') is a psychological one having
to do with cognitive use, ``What is the structure of memories?''
``Place,'' Albertus says, is ``something the soul itself makes for
storing images.'' He cites Boethius' commentary on Porphyry's
Isagoge, one of the basic logic texts of the medieval school, to the
effect that ``Everything which is born or made exists in space and
time.'' The images which memory stores are such creations. But their
temporal quality, that they are of the ``past,'' does not serve to
distinguish them, for ``pastness'' is a quality which they all share. So,
in order to remember particular matters, one focusses on what
distinguishes one memory from another, namely the qualities that
constitute ``place.''14
Our minds ``know'' most readily those things that are both orderly
and distinct from one another, for ``such things are more strongly
imprinted in it and more strongly affect it.'' The two qualities which
Albertus emphasizes are solemnis and rarus ± ``orderly'' and ``spaced
apart'' from one another. These are not their actual properties, but
are imagined to be so. Albertus understood that mnemonic places are
entirely pragmatic; they are cognitive schemata rather than objects.
They may entail likenesses of existing things (a church, a palace, a
garden) but they are not themselves real. They should be thought of
as ®ctive devices that the mind itself makes for remembering.

``Collective memory'' and memoria rerum
The mental ``places'' are associatively related to some content,
``through analogy and transference and metaphor, as for example, for
`joy' the most similar `place' is a cloister garth [pratum], and for
`feebleness' an in®rmary [in®rmaria] or hospice [hospitale] and for
`justice' a courtroom [consistorium].'' Thus, what we would call an
allegorical connection, and seek to attach to some real content
(though that reality is conceptual rather than material), is understood
here by Albertus as primarily a convenience, made necessary by the
epistemological condition that no human being can have direct
knowledge of any ``thing.'' All knowledge depends on memory, and
so it is all retained in images, ®ctions gathered into several places and
regrouped into new ``places'' as the thinking mind draws them
together.
having a place to put things
Before I discuss further how creativity was related to locational
memory, however, I need to make some more elementary de®nitions.
These are not peculiar to any one mnemonic technique, but are
shared by many because they appear to build upon the natural,
biological requirements of human learning and thinking. First of all,
human memory operates in ``signs''; these take the form of images
that, acting as cues, call up matters with which they have been
associated in one's mind. So, in addition to being signs, all memories
are also mental images (phantasiai).15
In rhetoric, the term phantasiai is generally reserved for emotionally laden ®ctions that act powerfully in memory and on the mind.16
Some traditions in ancient philosophy also recognized an emotional
component in all memory. Memory images are composed of two
elements: a ``likeness'' (similitudo) that serves as a cognitive cue or
token to the ``matter'' or res being remembered, and intentio or the
``inclination'' or ``attitude'' we have to the remembered experience,
which helps both to classify and to retrieve it. Thus, memories are all
images, and they are all and always emotionally ``colored.''
Pre-modern psychologies recognized the emotional basis of remembering, and considered memories to be bodily ``affects''; the
term affectus included all kinds of emotional reactions.17 This link of
strong memory to emotion is, interestingly enough, also emphasized
by at least some contemporary observation. A news article on
developments in neuropsychology reported that ``emotional mem14

Having a place to put things
ories involving fear [other emotions seem not to have been part of
the test] are permanently ingrained on the brain; they can be
suppressed but never erased.''18
But more is involved than simply an emotional state associated
with a memory. Latin intentio, derived from the verb intendo, refers
to the attitudes, aims, and inclinations of the person remembering, as
well as to the state of physical and mental concentration required. It
involves a kind of judgment, but one not that is simply rational.
Memories are not tossed into storage at random, they ``are put in''
their ``places'' there, ``colored'' in ways that are partly personal, partly
emotional, partly rational, and mostly cultural. Without this coloration or ``attitude,'' intentio, which we give to the matters we know,
we would have no inventory and therefore no place to put the
matters we have experienced.
Cicero sometimes used the word intentio almost as English uses
the word ``tuning,'' as a musician tightens (the root meaning of
intendo) the strings of his instrument. In his Tusculan Disputations (a
work revered by Augustine, as he tells us), while reviewing various
Greek theories of the soul's nature, Cicero mentions with favor
Aristoxenus of Tarentum, ``musician as well as philosopher, who held
the soul to be a special tuning-up [intentionem quandam] of the
natural body analogous to that which is called harmony in vocal and
instrumental music; answering to the nature and con®rmation of the
whole body, vibrations of different kinds are produced just as sounds
are in vocal music.''19 The Stoic concept which Cicero is rendering is
tonos, ``tone'' (as of muscles and of strings), a word also used
generally for the ``modes'' of music.20 The concept is recognizable in
monastic intentio, but it was applied spiritually and emotionally.
The monks thought of intentio as concentration, ``intensity'' of
memory, intellect, but also as an emotional attitude, what we now
might call a ``creative tension,'' willingly adopted, that enabled
productive memory work to be carried on (or that thwarted it, if
one's intentio were bad or one's will ineffectual). Reading of the
sacred text, both communal and in ``silence,'' needed to be undertaken with a particular intentio, that of ``charity.''
This ``intention'' is not a matter of doctrinal or philosophical
content, of de®nitions and classi®cations. Rather, it bears an analogy
to the rhetorical notion of benevolentia, the attitude of good will and
trust which an orator hoped to evoke in his audience by ®rst
approaching them in that spirit. As Augustine famously stated: ``I call

``Collective memory'' and memoria rerum
charity a movement of the mind toward [the goal of] fruitfully
enjoying God for His own sake, and [my]self and my neighbor for
God's sake.''21 A ``movement of the mind toward'' something involves not only affectus, or emotion, but also intentio.
This conception of intentio is certainly related to the one I just
discussed; if intentio is a part of every memory image, if it is the
coloration or attitude we have towards an experience, on the basis of
which we have determined where to ``hook'' it into the linked chains
of our ``places,'' then rekindling that sort of intentio will enable us to
start ®nding those memories again. Notice also that in this cognitive
model, emotions are not discrete mental ``entities,'' but are intricately
woven into exactly the same memory networks as are the facts and
objects of our experience, what we now call ``data.''22 And, though
our memories are ``intended'' in this sense from the start, we
constantly restructure and recompose them by means of the different
other intentiones we bring to our various occasions of remembering.
In such a psychology, there can be no such thing as either a truly
objective or a truly unconscious memory, because each remembered
thing requires to be intentionally ``marked'' and ``hooked in'' to our
own places. But like the cogs and wheels of a machine, the mnemonic
``places'' enable the whole structure to move and work. Mnemonic
images are called ``agent images'' in rhetoric, for they both are ``in
action'' and ``act on'' other things.
The power of this elementary technique is that it provides immediate access to whatever piece of stored material one may want,
and it also provides the means to construct any number of crossreferencing, associational links among the elements in such schemes.
In short, it provides a random-access memory, and also sets of
patterns or foundations upon which to construct any number of
additional collations and concordances of material. This latter goal,
the making of mental ``locations'' for ``gathering up'' (collocare) and
``drawing in'' (tractare), is where memoria and invention come
together in a single cognitive process.
``like a wise master-builder''
In ancient mnemotechnic, architecture was considered to provide the
best source of familiar memory locations. Architecture also plays an
essential role in the art of memory which is basic to my present study,
but the monastic version of architectural mnemonic carries non16

``Like a wise master-builder''
Roman resonances that make something rich and strange from the
forensic orator's set of memory ``rooms.'' These resonances, as one
might have predicted, are Biblical.
The monastic architectural mnemonic is founded, like a vast superstructure, on a key text from St. Paul, who, in 1 Corinthians 3:10±17,
compares himself to ``a wise master-builder'':
According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise
master-builder, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth
thereon. But let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.
For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver,
precious stones, wood, hay, stubble, Every man's work shall be
made manifest: for the day of the Lord shall declare it, because it
shall be revealed by ®re; and ®re shall try every man's work of what
sort it is. If any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he
shall receive a reward. If any man's work shall be burned, he shall
suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by ®re. Know ye
not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth
in you? If any man de®le the temple of God, him shall God destroy;
for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are.23

This passage gave license to a virtual industry of exegetical
architectural metaphors. Both as activity and artifact, the trope of
building has, as Henri de Lubac noted, ``une place privileÂgieÂe dans la
litteÂrature religieuse, doctrinale ou spirituelle.''24 The trope was used
by Philo, the second-century Jewish exegete, and there are also
intriguing connections between early Christian use and the mystical
``work'' of Jewish merkabah meditation, which uses several of the
same basic structures as early Christian exegesis.25 In medieval
Christianity, this Pauline text soon became the authority for a fully
developed mnemonic technique, using the planus (and sometimes
also the elevatio) of a building laid out in one's mind as the structure
for allegorical and moral meditation, the ``superstructures'' (superaedi®cationes) of sacra pagina.
Paul uses his architectural metaphor as a trope for invention, not
for storage. Likening himself to a builder, he says he has laid a
foundation ± a foundation which can only be Christ ± upon which
others are invited to build in their own way.26 From the beginning of
Christianity, the architecture trope is associated with invention in the
sense of ``discovery,'' as well as in the sense of ``inventory.'' The
foundation which Paul has laid acts as a device that enables the

``Collective memory'' and memoria rerum
inventions of others. This may seem a minor point in this text, but it
acquired major signi®cance later on as exegetical scholars elaborated
this ``foundation'' for meditational compositions of their own, invited
to do so by St. Paul himself.
The structures to be built upon were, initially, limited to those
measured out and described in the Old Testament. This is an early
tradition, probably with Jewish roots. De Lubac quotes Quodvultdeus (an associate of Augustine of Hippo): ``If you have a taste for
building, you have the construction of the world [Genesis 1], the
measurements of the Ark [Genesis 6], the enclosure of the Tabernacle
[Exodus 25±27], the erecting of the temple of Solomon [1 Kings 6],
all aspects in earthly terms of the Church itself, which they all ®gure
forth.''27
The earliest uses of this trope indicate that the compositional
devices which utilized Biblical buildings were never treated solely as
having a single content, like a diagram, or one speci®c task, in the
manner of a mathematical theorem, but rather as dispositive heuristics, devices for ``®nding'' out meanings.28 The distinction between
these two cognitive attitudes resides in whether a book or a church is
thought of as an object to be observed and studied for what it is in
itself ± for example, assuming that it just is, all by itself, an
encyclopedia in symbol-language, which we thus can describe as it
``really'' is ± or whether one thinks of a book or a church as a
machine, a tool that people use for social purposes such as symbolmaking. It's the difference between considering the work you are
contemplating as an end or as a means ± or, in familiar Augustinian
terms, between enjoying something for its own sake and using it for
social, that is ethical, purposes (remembering that Christians strive to
be ``citizens'' of the City of God).
Gregory the Great articulated the ``four senses'' of Biblical exegesis
in the form of a powerful mnemonic, a composition tool which
works on the model of the inventive circumstantiae (for example,
who, what, where, when, how) of ancient forensic rhetoric:29
First we put in place the foundations of literal meaning [historia];
then through typological interpretation we build up the fabric of
our mind in the walled city of faith; and at the end, through the
grace of our moral understanding, as though with added color, we
clothe the building.30

This maxim, much quoted later in the Middle Ages, is a recollection

``Like a wise master-builder''
ad res of Paul; Gregory could expect his audience to recognize it as
such. And he also casts the act of Biblical interpretation as an
invention process, an act of composing and fabrication.
The literal text is treated as though it presented a set of memorial
cues for the reader, a ``foundation'' which must then be realized by
erecting on it a mental fabric that uses everything which the ``citadel
of faith'' tosses up, and then coloring over the whole surface. In the
context of Scriptural hermeneutics, the ``walled city'' (arx, arcis) puns
both aurally on arca (``strongbox'' and ``Ark'') and visually on the
Temple citadel of Ezekiel, the ``city on a hill'' in Matthew, and the
Johannine ``Heavenly Jerusalem.''31 It is a useful coincidence too that
Gregory uses the word historia where later writers speak of sensus
litteralis: for the Biblical histories, especially of the Old Testament,
are treated as though each were a story-outline, one of One Hundred
Great Plots, whose chief purpose is to be retold.
In the minds of monastic writers, every verse of the Bible thus
became a gathering place for other texts, into which even the most
remote (in our judgments) and unlikely matters were collected, as the
associational memory of a particular author drew them in. Associations depending upon assonance and dissimilarity are just as likely to
end up being collated as those of consonance and likeness. A
memorative web can be constructed using either principle, and often
(as in rememberings of the Last Judgment) using both together.
And the proof of a teller is in the quality and character of his
fabrication and coloring ± the reconstruction, not the repetition of
the ``facts'' of foundational plots. There seems to be very little interest
in ``the facts'' per se. Instead, retelling a story is cast as a question of
judgment and character. Paul says that ``the ®re shall try every man's
work.'' He emphasizes that this is not a determinant of salvation ± a
poor workman will be saved even if his work burns up (1 Corinthians 3:15). But the assaying ®re will manifest the quality of
individual work ± whether your walls are built of gold or of stubble.
The concern in Paul, as in later writers using this theme, is with
ethics, not with reproduction, or ± to put the matter in terms of
memory ± with recollection not with rote. You are God's temple, the
commonplace went, and the inventive work of building its superstructures is entrusted to your memory. This Pauline theme is
realized over and over, in literary works, in monastic architecture,
and in the decoration of both.
The inventional nature of the master-builder trope is still clear in its

``Collective memory'' and memoria rerum
twelfth-century use. That master-teacher, Hugh of St. Victor, says that
since sacred scripture is like a building, those studying it should be like
masons, architecti.
Take a look at what the mason does. When the foundation has
been laid, he stretches out his string in a straight line, he drops his
perpendicular, and then, one by one, he lays the diligently
polished stones in a row. Then he asks for other stones, and still
others . . . See now, you have come to your [reading], you are
about to construct the spiritual building. Already the foundations
of the story have been laid in you: it remains now that you found
the bases of the superstructure. You stretch out your cord, you
line it up precisely, you place the square stones into the course,
and, moving around the course, you lay the track, so to say, of the
future walls.32

Notice how this passage recalls the Pauline text, without ever
directly mentioning it (a very common device for intertextual
memoria).33 A student is to use the mental building he has laid out
on the foundation of his ``historical'' knowledge of the Bible ± that is,
of its ``story'' ± as a structure in which to gather all the bits of his
subsequent learning. Such mnemotechnically constructed ``superstructures'' (a Pauline word) are useful not as devices for reproduction alone (rote), but as collecting and re-collecting mechanisms with
which to compose the designs of one's own learning, and ``be able to
build [i]nto [t]his structure whatever [one] afterwards ®nds'' in the
``great sea of books and . . . the manifold intricacies of opinions'' that
one will encounter throughout one's own life.34 It is as important to
get this foundation right as it is for any builder to make his
foundations ``true.''
But the foundation is not to be confused with the completed
structure. It is the ground, but not the key: it ``authorizes,'' in the
medieval sense, by initiating and originating further construction.
The ``key'' ± the ``character'' and ``®nish'' of the master-mason's craft
± will lie in the relatively bene®cial use which one makes of this
common grounding. This is, as St. Paul stressed, a matter not just of
salvation but of beauty and bene®t, of ornamentum conceived of in
the classical sense in which ``usefulness'' is merged with ``delight.''
Medieval reading habits are based upon a model of craft mastery, the
``courses'' of stone or brick or other materials which a master mason
may make in building a wall, with concomitant emphasis upon
preparation (the ground), routines of exercise (discipline), and stages

``Like a wise master-builder''
in a way towards making a ®nished artifact, a mastery that affords
pleasure.35
When the foundation plan has been laid out with one's internal
builder's measuring line, one's lineus or linea, and picked out with
stones, then the walls may be raised:
and if [the mason] by chance ®nds some [stones] that do not ®t
with the ®xed course he has laid, he takes his ®le, smoothes off
the protruding parts, ®les down the rough spots and the places
that do not ®t, reduces to form, and so at last joins them to the
rest of the stones set into the row . . . The foundation is in the
earth, and it does not always have smoothly ®tted stones. The
superstructure rises above the earth, and it demands a smoothly
proportioned construction. The divine page is just the same . . .
The foundation which is under the earth we have said stands for
history, and the superstructure which is built upon it we have said
suggests allegory.36

The shape or foundation of a composition must be thought of as a
place-where-one-invents. Everything is ®tted onto it. And as the
composer, acting like a master builder or architectus, ®ts his tropes
onto the foundation stones of a text, he must smooth, scrape, chip
off, and in other ways adapt and ``translate'' the dicta et facta
memorabilia he is using as his materials.37 So the edi®ce of one's life
(so to speak), although created from stories available to all citizens, is
also a fully personal creation, an expression (and creation) of one's
character.38 This is plain in St. Paul's injunction to be like a wise
master-builder: the ®re will try the quality of your work.
Thus, because it builds entirely through the associations made in
some individual's mind, memory work has an irreducibly personal
and private or ``secret'' dimension to it. That is also why it is a moral
activity, an activity of character and what was called ``temperament.''39
At the same time, because most of its building materials are
common to all ± are in fact common places ± memory work is also
fully social and political, a truly civic activity. The constant balance
of individual and communal, ethos and pathos, is adjusted and
engineered with the tools of rhetoric: images and ®gures, topics and
schemes. Essential among these tools are the memorial res, the
building blocks of new composition.

``Collective memory'' and memoria rerum
the wise master-builder's machine
However, a memory, no matter how beautifully put together, is not
itself invention. It is, as my heading should emphasize, a machine for
performing the tasks of invention. This constructional view of
human memory is very dif®cult for modern students to grasp
intuitively: we are deeply attached to the belief that memory should
be for reiterating and repeating things like a parrot, that memory is
only good for passing examinations; we profess to be appalled (while
knowing it all along to be true) that our memories can be ``wrong.''
Another kind of dif®culty for some of us may arise from modern
ideas of machines. As we use the word, ``machine'' is often contrasted
to ``human,'' betraying our deep assumption that what is mechanical
(like what is arti®cial) is antithetical to human life and particularly to
human ``values.'' We can think of machines as suspiciously nonhuman and indeed as rivals of human endeavor, as we can think of
technologies as self-suf®cient ``systems,'' perhaps even with lives of
their own. But pre-modern, pre-industrial, cultures did not share this
assumption. Their machines were fully human.
A machina, according to Isidore of Seville, is a device that
architects or masiones (``masons'') use in order to construct the fabric
of buildings.40 In classical Latin machina was any sort of a hoist ±
hence its association with building. Isidore derives the word masiones
from machina, because masons, also called architecti or ``masterbuilders,'' build upon foundations and so require machinae in order
to work on the high walls and the roof.41 So the concept of an
architectus seems for Isidore to be someone who particularly fashions
walls and roof: he may also lay the foundation, as St. Paul says of
himself, but the proof of his excellence will lie in his superstructures,
Paul's ``superaedi®cationes.'' A mason or architectus is also an
inventor and maker, as was the inventor of architecture, Daedalus.
And Isidore ends this discussion by observing that St. Paul called
himself an architectus because, like a wise master-builder, he built up
and added onto a foundation.
Machines move. They are engines which move other things about,
and they themselves have moving parts. An early Christian speci®cation of the trope is as the machina universalis, the cosmic machine
constructed and raised by God, as ®rst arti®cer and master builder.
``He indeed, the arti®cer of this world, fabricated a machine, and like
a wise master-builder he hung the heaven on high, formed the earth

The wise master-builder's machine
into a great mole or dam, bound together the seas in links.''42 A
machine is the essential tool of the Pauline ``wise master-builder.''
Any structure that lifts things up or helps to construct things is a
machina. Isidore says that the wheel driven by water in a water mill
is a kind of machina. Tertullian called the Cross ``the machine of the
pierced body,'' and in a much later monastic trope, the human body
was sometimes called machina rerum, a microcosmic analogy to the
machina aetherea of the cosmos.43 Machines could also be destructive engines: the word is used for siege engines in many chronicles. It
can refer to the trellises which lift and support the vines (in Jerome)
or ± in a riddle of Aldhelm's ± to the hoist that was used to build on
top of a cliff a beacon for seafarers.44 All these structures lift, raise,
and move. They are also all constructions of a variety of materials,
made for a variety of purposes, good and ill. They are all tools for
lifting and making.
Mental constructions can also be called machines, and it is this use
of the metaphor that most interests me here. In one of his letters,
Augustine recalls 1 Corinthians 8:1, ``scientia in¯at, charitas aedi®cat,'' ``knowledge puffs up, but charity builds.'' This verse is yet
another Pauline turn on the trope that thinking is like constructing a
building (that is, ``edi®cation''). Augustine then comments that
``knowledge should be used as though it were a kind of machine, by
means of which the structure of charity rises up, which lasts forever,
even as knowledge shall be destroyed.''45 Gregory the Great, invoking the same ®gure, says that ``the machine of the mind is the
energy of love'' by which in this existence we are lifted on high.46
This ``machine'' is contemplation, which can lift up the human soul.
Implicit in this characterization, of course, is that ``contemplation'' is
also an inventive act, a ``construction.''
Medieval memoria thus includes, in our terms, ``creative thought,''
but not thoughts created ``out of nothing.'' It built upon remembered
structures ``located'' in one's mind as patterns, edi®ces, grids, and ±
most basically ± association-fabricated networks of ``bits'' in one's
memory that must be ``gathered'' into an idea. Memory work is also
process, like a journey; it must therefore have a starting-point. And
this assumption leads again to the need for ``place,'' because remembering is a task of ``®nding'' and of ``getting from one place to
another'' in your thinking mind.
Hugh of St. Victor, master-constructionist that he was, exploited
the building trope at many points (several of which we have already

``Collective memory'' and memoria rerum
examined) in his treatise on education, which he called Didascalicon.
In characterizing geometry, of all the seven liberal arts the one
essential for a wise master-builder, he calls it ``well-spring of perceptions and source of sayings.''47 This is an odd characterization, we
might suppose, for such a non-verbal, abstract art. Hugh was quoting
Cassiodorus; but Cassiodorus was characterizing the topica of argument, the ``seats of argument, the well-spring of perceptions, the
origin [as initiator] of speaking.''48 In other words, Hugh understood
geometry, the science of ``forms,'' to apply not just to the physical
world but also to the cognitive one, to the fabricating of the schemes
and patterns for thinking, for constructing the buildings of the mind
from and within the sedes or locations of remembered ``things'':
sensus (perceptions, feelings, attitudes, judgments), dictiones (sayings
and speakings), and facta (``events'' as stories).

MEMORIA RERUM , REMEMBERING THINGS
inventory fables: teaching the lore of one's craft
The literary criticism directed in this century at mythic and visionary
stories has considered them mostly in terms of their mimesis, their
``representation of reality'' in Erich Auerbach's phrase ± whether that
``reality'' be natural, social, or psychological. I have a somewhat
different set of questions to ask about them, having to do with their
cognitive functioning. I can best illustrate this difference by considering a category of common mnemotechnical myths.
Astronomers are accustomed to divide up the visible stars into
``constellations'' named for various things ± animals, mythic beings,
implements. For sky charts, artists draw a more or less naturalistic
®gure of a hunter (for example) around the stars that make up Orion
± his belt, his dagger, his feet, his arms ± and the two dogs which
follow him, Canis major and Canis minor.
Such charts are very old. Plate 5, from a manuscript made about
the year 1000 by a famous scribe, Abbot Odbert of the monastery of
Saint-Bertin in north-western France, shows a chart of the northern
sky made for a common textbook, Aratus' Phainomena, a Greek
poem about the constellations that was translated into Latin in
antiquity and used as an elementary astronomy text in monastic
pedagogy.49 It was common in monastery libraries, and contained

Inventory fables: teaching the lore of one's craft
both descriptions of individual constellations (with drawings in some
manuscripts), and charts of the whole sky with the circles of the
Celestial Equator, the Ecliptic (with all the Zodiac constellations
painted in it), and the Milky Way (labeled lacteus circulus). In Plate 5,
Orion and his dogs are visible in the lower right quadrant, between
the Ship (Puppis) and the Whale (Cetus), and just below Gemini. At
the center of this chart are Ursa minor, the Little Bear, with Polaris,
the North Star, in its tail, and Draco, the dragon, snaking around to
point at Ursa major, the Great Bear.
In explanation of the origins of these ®gures, we are earnestly told
by some modern encyclopedia articles that vaguely de®ned ``primitive peoples,'' viewing the night sky, thought the star groups ``looked
like'' such creatures, and they then named them accordingly and
made up myths to explain how they got there. All the star myths are
assumed to be of a genre known as etiological fable, a story to
explain the origin of something. The book of Genesis is ®lled with
such stories; Kipling's Just-So Stories are an example as well (as
indeed, is the encyclopedia explanation I just cited).
When I look up at the grouping of stars called ``Orion'' I confess
that I see nothing ``like'' a human hunter ± and in fact I'm never sure
which stars (beyond the basic pattern, which I can see readily)
``belong'' to Orion and which do not. Orion's dogs seem to me even
less imitative of the shapes of dogs I have known. So, either
``primitive people'' (the Hellenistic Greeks!!) were a lot more easily
satis®ed with what constituted the likeness of a hunter and his dogs
than I am, or something else was going on in their minds than
recognizing earthly shapes in the skies.
Indeed, the makers of Aratus manuscripts, and other medieval
encyclopedias of the constellations, seem to have felt it necessary to
describe the individual constellations as star patterns ®rst of all:
patterns which were then keyed to a constellation's name by drawing a
rough ®gure around them. Plate 6 shows several such groupings from
a ninth-century manuscript of a work by Isidore of Seville (itself
liberally incorporating material from Aratus), also made in northern
France. These books, though made for students whose minds were as
primitive as the minds of beginning students always are, do not
counsel a student ``now look up in the sky and ®nd the dog.'' Instead
they counsel ``look in the sky for thus-and-so pattern of stars in thusand-such position,'' the same way we do now. In other words, the
teachers who made these books assumed that the pattern is what one

``Collective memory'' and memoria rerum
would recognize, not a ``dog'' or a ``bull'': they recognized, just as we
now do, that such names are conventional.
But if the constellation ®gures are not imitative of some thing,
even if it is only fantastical, then what are they for? What people
needed from star charts was a way of quickly and unerringly picking
out certain stars, for their position was essential in the conduct of
daily life ± to calculate the calendar, to navigate, to plant, to know
when to do a host of things. And a great many random items, such as
the individual stars, are not retrievable, and so cannot be learned
unless they are organized into patterns that allow people readily to
®nd them.
The constellations form a stellar inventory, one that is easily
reconstructable, both in part and as a whole, and also one whose plan
is completely distinctive. A sky map has the qualities of being both
solemnis and rarus, to use Albertus Magnus' terms. The purpose of
organizing stars into constellation patterns is not ``representation,''
but to aid human beings, needing to ®nd various stars, to locate them
by means of a recognizable pattern retrieved immediately and securely
from their own memories. Constellations are mnemotechnical tools.
The constellation patterns were also embedded in stories (though
few people now know them): narratives that attach the patterns
together, or embed important characteristics about the particular
constellations, such as where and at what season they appear in the
night sky. ``Locating'' things to be remembered in a story is an
elementary human mnemonic principle; known in practice to every
society, the mnemonic power and ¯exibility of narrative was con®rmed in the experiments of F. C. Bartlett earlier in this century.50
In the case of Orion, several stories are told. Nearly all of them
refer to the constellation's position in the sky. He is associated with
Artemis (another hunter, though she especially used a bow) in some;
or he was stung to death by a great scorpion (on Artemis' order); or
he was chasing the Pleiades when they were all turned into stars.
Orion is a constellation of the late fall ± hunting season, the season
marked by the Zodiac constellations of Scorpio (the scorpion) and
Sagittarius (like Artemis, an archer, and one who, embodied in
Chiron the centaur, was instructed by her). The position of Orion is
such that as the stars move, Orion could be said to ``chase'' the
Pleiades. A myth of the birth of Orion has him ``born from urine,''
making a pun on his name, Orion, and the Greek word for urine,
ouron.51

Introduction

2.Jeffrey Shaw, The Legible City
(Amsterdam), 1990

The 1990s witnessed a technological development of unprecedented speed for the digital medium - the so-called 'digital
revolution'. Even though the foundations of many digital
technologies had been laid up to sixty years earlier, these technologies became seemingly ubiquitous during the last decade of
the twentieth century: hardware and software became more
refined and affordable, and the advent of the World Wide Web in
the mid-1990s added a layer of 'global connectivity'. Artists have
always been among the first to reflect on the culture and technology of their time, and decades before the digital revolution had
been officially proclaimed, they were experimenting with the
digital medium. At first, the fruits of their labours were mostly
exhibited at conferences, festivals, and symposia devoted to technology or electronic media, and were considered peripheral, at
best, to the mainstream art world. But by the end of the century,
'digital art' had become an established term, and museums and
galleries around the world had started to collect and organize
major exhibitions of digital work.
The terminology for technological art forms has always been
extremely fluid and what is now known as digital art has undergone several name changes since it first emerged: once referred
to as 'computer art' (since the 1970s) and then 'multimedia art',
digital art now takes its place under the umbrella term 'new
media art', which at the end of the twentieth century was used
mostly for film and video, as well as sound art and other hybrid
forms. The qualifier of choice here - 'new'- points to the fleeting
nature of the terminology. But the claim of novelty also begs the
question, what exactly is supposed to be considered 'new' about
the digital medium? Some of the concepts explored in digital art
date back almost acentury, and many others have been previously
addressed in various 'traditional' arts. What is in fact new is that
digital technology has now reached such a stage of development
that it offers entirely new possibilities for the creation and experience of art. Some of these possibilities will be outlined here.
The term 'digital art' has itself become an umbrella for such a
broad range of artistic works and practices that it does not
describe one unified set of aesthetics. This book will provide a

survey of the multiple forms of digital art, the basic characteristics of their aesthetic language, and their technological and
art-historical evolution. One of the basic but crucial distinctions
made here is that between art that uses digital technologies as a
tool for the creation of traditional art objects - such as a photograph, print, sculpture, or music - and art that employs these
technologies as its very own medium,being produced, stored, and
presented exclusively in the digital format and making use of its
interactive or participatory features. While both of these kinds of
art share some of the inherent characteristics of digital technology, they are often distinctly different in their manifestations and
aesthetics. These two broad categories are not meant as a definitive classification but rather as a preliminary diagram of a
territory that is by its natureextremely hybrid. Whiledefinitions
and categories may be helpful in identifying certain distinguishing characteristics of a medium, they can also be dangerous in
setting up predefined limits for approaching and understanding
an art form, particularly when it is still constantly evolving, as is
the case with digital art. While this book tries to be as inclusiveas
possible when it comes to the various manifestations ofdigital art
and the ways in which they expand and challenge artistic practice, it still presents only a small selection of the broad range of
digital work that has been created. Many of the forms and themes
of digital art outlined in the following pages could easily be subjects of entire books of their own.
A short history of technology and art

For obvious reasons, the history of digital art has been shaped
as much by the history of science and technology as by arthistorical influences. The technological history of digital art is
inextricably linked to the military-industrial complex and to
research centres, as well as to consumer culture and its associated
technologies (a fact that plays a prominent role in many of the
artworks discussed in this book). Computers were essentially
'born' in an academic and research environment, and still today
research universities and centres play a major role in the production of some forms of digital art.
In 1945, Atiantic Monthly published the article 'As We May
Think' by army scientist Vannevar Bush, an essay that had a
profound influence on the history of computing. The article
described a device called the Memex, a desk with translucent
screens that would allow users to browse documents and create
their own trail through a body of documentation. Bush envi-

.date unknown
Â¥Kft (Universal Automatic
f) was used successfully

iat Dwight D.
Â¥woulwin the 1952
rtial election.

sioned that the Memex's contents - books, periodicals, images could be purchased on microfilm, ready for insertion, and that
there would also be possibilities for direct data entry by the user.
The Memex was never built, but it can be seen as a conceptual
ancestor to the potential of electronically linked materials and,
ultimately, to the Internet as a huge, globally accessible, linked
database. It was essentially an analogue device, but in 1946, the
University of Pennsylvania presented the world's first digital
computer, known as ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator
and Computer), which took up the space of a whole room; and
saw the patenting of the first commercially availabledigital
computer, UNIVAC, which was capable of processing numerical
as well as textual data. The 1940s also marked the beginnings of
the science of cybernetics'(from the Greek term kybemetes,meaning governor' or 'steersman'). American mathematician Norbert
Wiener  coined the term for the comparative study
ofdifferent communication and control systems, such as the computer and the human brain. Wiener's theories formed the basis
for an understanding of the so-called man-machine symbiosis, a
concept later explored by a number of digital artists.
The 1960s turned out to be a particularly important decade
for the history of digital technologies - a time when the groundwork for much of today's technology and its artistic exploration

was laid. Vannevar Bush's basic ideas were carried to a further
level by American Theodor Nelson who, in 196 1, created the
words 'hypertext' and 'hypermedia' for a space of writing and
reading where texts, images, and sounds could be electronically
interconnected and linked by anyone contributing to a networked 'docuverse'. Nelson's hyperlinked environment was
branching and nonlinear, allowing r e a d e d w r i t e r s to choose
their own path through the information. His concepts obviously
anticipated the networked transfer of files and messages over the
Internet, which originated around the same time (and, indeed,
the World Wide Web as a global network of linked webpages,
which was developed in the 1990s). Earlier, in 1957, the USSR's
launch of Sputnik at the height of the Cold War had prompted the
United States to create the Advanced Research Projects Agency
(ARPA) within the Department of Defense in order to maintain a
leading position in technology. In 1964, the RAND corporation,
the foremost Cold War think-tank, developed a proposal for
ARPA that conceptualized the Internet as a communication network without central authority that would be safe from a nuclear
attack. By 1969, the infant network-named ARPANET, after its
Pentagon sponsor - was formed by four of the 'supercomputers'
of the time: at the University of California at Los Angeles, the
University of California at Santa Barbara, the Stanford Research
Institute, and the University of Utah.
T h e end of the decade saw the birth of yet another important
concept in computer technology and culture: the information
space and 'interface'. In late 1968, Douglas Engelbart from the
Stanford Research Institute introduced the ideas of bitmapping,
windows, and direct manipulation through a mouse. His concept
of bitmapping was groundbreaking in that it established a connection between the electrons floating through a computer's
processor and an image on the computer screen. A computer
processes in pulses of electricity that manifest themselves in
either an 'on' o r 'off' state, commonly referred to as the binaries
'one' and 'zero'. In bitmapping, each pixel of the computer screen
is assigned to small units of the computer's memory, bits, whick
can also manifest themselves as 'on' or 'off' and be described a5
'zero' or 'one'. T h e computer screen could thus be imagined as E
grid of pixels that are either on or off, lit up or dark, and that create a two-dimensional space. T h e direct manipulation of this
space by pointing o r dragging was made possible by Engelbart's
invention of themouse, theextension of the user's hand into dataspace. T h e basic concepts of Engelbart and his colleague Ivan

I'

Sutherland were further developed in the 1970s by Alan Kay and
a team of researchers a t Xerox PARC in Palo Alto, California, and
resulted in the creation of the Graphic User Interface (GUI) and
the 'desktop' metaphor with its layered 'windows' on the screen.
T h e desktop metaphor would finally be popularized by Apple's
Macintosh, 'the computer for the rest of us', as it was marketed by
its creators in 1983.
Digital a r t did not develop in an art-historical vacuum either,
but has strong connections to previous a r t movements, among
them Dada, Fluxus, and conceptual art. T h e importance of these
movements for digital a r t resides in their emphasis on formal
instructions and in their focus on concept, event, and audience
participation, as opposed t o unified material objects. Dadaist
poetry aestheticized the construction of poems out of random
variations of words and lines, using formal instructions to create
an artifice that resulted from an interplay of randomness and
control. This idea of rules being a process for creating a r t has a

Kinetic

clear connection with the algorithms that form the basis of all
software and every computer operation: a procedure of formal
instructions that accomplish a 'result' in a finite number of steps.
Just as with Dadaist poetry, the basis of any form of computer art
is the instruction as a conceptual element. The notions of interaction and 'virtuality' in art were also explored early on by artists
such as Marcel Duchamp and Laszl6 Moholy-Nagy in relation to
objects and their optical effects. Duchamp's Rotary Glass Plates
(Precision Optics),created in 1920 with Man Ray, consisted of an
optical machine and invited users to turn on the apparatus and
stand at a certain distance from it in order to see the effect unfold,
while the influence of Moholy-Nagy's kinetic light sculptures
and his idea of virtual volumes - 'the outline or trajectory presented by an object in motion'-can be traced in numerous digital
installations. Duchamp's work, in particular, has been extremely
influential in the realm of digital art: the shift from object to concept embodied in many of his works can be seen as a predecessor
of the 'virtual object' as a structure in process, and his readymades connect with the appropriation and manipulation of
'found' (copied) images that play a dominant role in many digital
artworks. Duchamp himself described his work L.H.O.O.Q.
, areproduction of the Mona Lisa on which he drew a
moustache and goatee, as 'a combination readymade and iconoclastic dadaism'. The combinatorial and 'strict rule-based
processes of Dadaist poetry also resurfaced in the works of
OULIPO (Ouvroir de Littkrature Potentielle), the French literary and artistic association founded in 1960 by Raymond
Queneau and Francois Le Lionnais, who argued that all creative
inspiration should be subject to calculation and become an intellectual game, and whose experimental concepts of combination
compare to the reconfiguration of media elements in many later
computer-generated environments.
The events and happenings of the international Fluxus
group of artists, musicians, and performers in the 1960s were also
often based on the execution ofprecise instructions. Their fusion
of audience participation and event as the smallest unit of a situation in many ways anticipated the interactive, event-based nature
of some computer artworks. The concepts of the 'found' element
and instructions in relation to randomness also formed the basis
of the musical compositions of vanguard American composer
John Cage, whose work in the 1950s and'60s is most relevant to a
history of digital art, and in many ways anticipated numerous
experiments in interactive art. Cage described structure in music
IS

pue wS\[01 s o y d e  S a  o010.9
l d Su!Sue -   ( J O paluasajd
M
10ainwsu1 am ye ,h!d!puaag
u o p u q u! SIJV AeodluaucQ
o p a u  a q X uopiqiqxa
,
aip '8961 UI *so961 a q in pai!q!qxa
SUOpBIIaSU! m!S!p SBPO JO SJOSSaWpaJd
.uopuamuadxa
OQSQJB J O 
asnoquaa.iSe

1SJI.J

O S P 3J3M

-U8!3S PUB ' S J    J B'SJUIUIBJSOJ
 S  J
'sJu@
'
u  UaaW8q
u o p e  o q e  xqdinoo
oo
aip JO aoue;su! J S J e SBM J . V  w d e f
SO u! oi. odxa IJOM, sip ye uo!vhed ewy!sdaj q ye Kpse
a -ladsef
pire q.10MaN saouem-iopad u! uaas ISJI3  suqor
pue ' a g E uqof ' X p n S q ueaf
,
'Saquaqosnexwaqoy '  o q  e f i
Apuy SB qons SJSQLB pue J  A uaaqaq
B 
apeoap e J  A Opadopap
aJaM fevaÃ§(
 q o f a q ., ^ s g pue.iaa@ua
e
uaawaq uope.10
-qerooaApoaga ue d o p a p , 01w s a p BJO $nopaui.10SBM-SPJOM
SJiaAnm in - q3iqM '(Jv) & S O I O U
pUE
 JV. v s  u a u q  a d x g
papunoj J B A  M An!g '9961 u1 .^So1ouq3a pue JJB uaawaq
S U O Q   S J  aip
U ! u! paisaJaiq ASu?searau
aureoaq S  S  J'ma
E
opo.ow1a am oiu! u o y s u e . Q! apem a& i e y s n p q a q sy

fry

Exhibition poster for
'Cybernetic Serendipity',

sound 'environments' and sensing 'robots' - that now seem only
like the humble origins of digital art (and could be criticized for
their clunkiness and overly technical approaches),but which
nonetheless anticipated many of the important characteristics of
the medium today. Some works focused on the aesthetics of
machines and transformation, such as painting- machines and
pattern or poetry generators. Others were dynamicand processoriented, exploring possibilities of interaction and the 'open'
system as a post-object In his articles 'Systems Aesthetics' and
'Real Time Systems' (published in Anfwum in 1968 and 1969,
respectively), American art historian and critic Jack Burnham
' systems viewpoint is
explored a 'systems approach' to art: A
focused on the creation of stable, on-going relationshipsbetween
organic and non-organic systems.' In modified form, this
approach to art as a system still holds a noticeable position in
today's critical discourse on digital art. In 1970, Burnham
curated an exhibition called 'Software' at the Jewish Museum of
New York, which included works such as the prototype of
Theodor Nelson's hypertext system X a d u .
Using'new technology' such asvideoand satellites,artists in
the 1970s also began to experiment with 'live performances' and
networks that anticipated the interactions now taking place on
the Internet and through the use of 'streaming media', the direct
broadcast of video and audio. The focus of these projects ranged
from the application of satellites for extending the mass dissemination of a television broadcast to the aesthetic potential of video
teleconferencingand the exploration of a real-time virtual space

Liza Bear,
Network


that collapsed geographic boundaries. At the Documenta VI art
show in Kassel, Germany, in 1977, Douglas Davis organized a
satellite telecast to more than twenty-five countries, which
included performances by Davis himself, Nam June Paik, Fluxus
artist and musician Charlotte Moorman, and German artist
Joseph Beuys. In the same year, a collaboration between artists
in New York and San Francisco resulted in SendReceive Satellite
Network, a fifteen-hour, two-way, interactive satellite transmission between the two cities. Also in 1977,what became known
as 'the world's first interactive satellite dance performance' a three-location, live-feed composite performance involving
performers on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of the United States
-was organized by Kit Galloway and Sherrie Rabinowitz, in conjunction with NASA and the Educational Television Center in
Men10 Park, California. The project established what the creators called an 'image as place', a composite reality that immersed
performers in remote places into a new form of 'virtual' space.
In 1982, the Canadian artist Robert Adrian, who began working
with communication technology in 1979 and created projects
involving fax, slow-scan TV, and radio, organized the event The
Worldin 24 Hours, in which artists in sixteen cities on three continents were connected for twenty-four hours by fax, computers,
and videophone and created and exchanged 'multimedia' artworks. These performative events were early explorations of
the connectivity that is an inherent characteristic of networked
digital art.
Throughout the 1970s and '80s, painters, sculptors, architects, printmakers, photographers, and video and performance
artists increasingly began to experiment with new computer
imaging techniques. During this period, digital art evolved into
multiple strands of practice, ranging from more object-oriented
work to pieces that incorporated dynamic and interactive aspects
and constituted a process-oriented virtual object. Expanding on
the concepts of movements such as Fluxus and conceptual art,
digital technologies and interactive media have challenged traditional notions of the artwork, audience, and artist. The artwork is
often transformed into an open structure in process that relies on
a constant flux of information and engages the viewerparticipant in the way a performance might do. The public or audience
becomes a participant in the work, reassembling the textual,
visual, and aural components of the project. Rather than being
the sole 'creator' of a work of art, the artist often plays the role
of a mediator or facilitator for audiences' interaction with and


,

museum to be presented or introduced to the public. In the online
world, the physical gallerymuseum context does not necessarily work as a signifier of status any longer. However, physical art
spaces could nonetheless play an important role when it comes to
Internet art - providing a context for the work, chronicling its
developments, assisting in its preservation, as well as expanding
its audience. Various models for presenting net art in an institutional context have been widely debated. Some people have
argued that it should be presented only online and that 'it belongs
on the Internet'- which is where it resides in any case. Thequestion rather seems to be, should Internet access be possible in
public spaces or only from home computers in a private setting?
Given the more recent developments in wireless technologies
and mobile devices, the Internet might soon be accessible from
anywhere. However, this does not erase the fact that Internet art
often requires a relatively private engagement over a longer
period of time. To create an environment for the latter experience, net art has often been presented in a separate area of a public
space, which in turn raises the criticism of 'ghettoization'. The
set-up in a separate 'lounge area' has the advantage of inviting
people to spend more time with a piece, but it prevents the art
from being seen in the context of more traditional media and
entering into a dialogue with them. Ultimately, the exhibition
environment should be defined by what an artwork requires. As
the technology keeps developing rapidly and is increasingly integrated into our daily lives, we are in alllikelihood going to see
new ways of interacting with and relating to digital art.
The collection (and therefore the sale) of digital art is yet
another topic that has been hotly debated since the art form
began to register on the radar of the art market. The value of art at least when it comes to the traditional model - is inextricably
linked to its economic value, but the 'scarcity equals value' model
does not necessarily work when it comes to digital art. It is less
problematic when it comes to digital installations, which ultimately are objects, or software art (which sometimes comes with
its own unique custom hardware). The model of limited editions
established by photography has been adopted by some digital
artists whose work consists mostly of software, and this has
allowed their art to enter the collections of major museums
around the world. In the context of collecting, Internet art is the
. most problematic form since it is accessible to anyone with a network connection. Nevertheless, net art is increasingly being
commissioned and collected by museums, with the source codeof

the work being hosted on the respective museum's server. A
major difference between this and the museum's other holdings is
that the work stays on view permanently and not only when the
museum decides to mount it in a gallery.
The process of collecting art also entails the responsibility of
maintaining it, which may be one of the biggest challenges that
digital art poses. Digital art is often referred to as ephemeral and
unstable, a label that is only partially accurate. Any time-based
art piece, such as a performance, is essentially ephemeral and
often continues to exist after the went only in its documentation.
Process-oriented digital artworks certainly are ephemeral, but
digital technology also allows for enhanced possibilities of
recording; the whole process of a time-based digital artwork can
potentially be recorded as an archive. Bits and bytes are in fact
more stable than paint, film, or videotape. As long as one has the
instructions to compile the code - for example as a print-out
on paper - the work itself is not lost. What makes digital art
unstable are the rapid changes and developments in hardware
and software, from changes in operating systems to increasing
screen resolution and upgrades of Web browsers. Collecting
software and hardware as it continues to be developed is obviously the least elegant solution to preservation. Two basic
preservation strategies are so-called 'emulators', programs that
allow one to 're-create' software or operating systems, and
migration, an upgrade to the next version of hardwaresoftware.
Initiatives aimed at preserving digital art are currently being
developed by governments, national and international organizations, as well as institutions. The success of these initiatives will
depend largely on standardization, which requires a continuous
dialogue between all the parties involved.
Digital art has made enormous developments since the early
and there is no doubt that it is here to stay. The expansion
of digital technologies and their impact on our lives and cultures
will induce the creation of even more artworks that reflect and
critically engage with this cultural phenomenon. Whether digital art will find a permanent home in museums and art
institutions or exist in different contexts - supported and presented by a growing number of art-and-technology centres and
research-anddevelopment labs- remains to be seen howwer.

